# 10.10 ILLUSTRATIVE APPLICATIONS

## 10.10.1 FedEx Flight Management Using Simulated Annealing (Campbell et al. 1997)


Federal Express (FedEx) is one of the world's largest express transportation company. Handling 3.4 million packages in over 220 countries every working day, with 650 aircraft and over 4,700 pilots, it is not surprising that the company must rely on a variety of analytical tools for scheduling and coordinating its activities.
In 1993, during negotiations involving pay rates and work rules with the Air Line Pilots Association, the 20 -year-old company recognized the need to be able to evaluate alternatives to its traditional methods for scheduling work for its pilots. In particular, they needed a way to automatically build individual trips (flight legs) into lines of work (called bid lines). The method needed to be sufficiently fast and efficient that many alternatives could be generated, compared, and considered during, as well as after, negotiations with the pilots' association.
The scheduling questions demanded the use of a so-called bid-line generator, software that could compose units of work for pilots to bid on. The goal is to maximize the amount of flying assigned to bid lines and minimize the number of bid lines. Pilots submit bids by listing their preferred sequences of flights, and work assignments are made according to the pilot's seniority.
The number of inputs and constraints for generating the bid lines make the problem almost overwhelming. Considerations include

- Aircraft type.
- Crew size and requirements.
- Origin and destination cities.
- Layover cities.
- Number of trips in a line.
- Scheduled times and days.
- FAA regulations governing flight periods and rest periods.
- FAA day off and maximum duty length regulations.
- Crew turnarounds.
- International/domestic mixtures (generally undesirable).
- Week on/week off mixtures (generally desirable).

The bid line generator should generate bid lines that not only meet the hard constraints but that maximize line value (desirability to the pilots and productivity for FedEx) and minimize cost over all bid lines.
Details were kept to a minimum, but so many factors contribute to the composition of bid lines that the 0-1 integer programming model, with all its constraints, quickly became unwieldy-even to formulate, and much more so to actually solve. Simulated annealing proved to be the solution method of choice for this problem. Implementation was in C++ on a Unix workstation. The random changes to a current configuration involved arbitrarily selecting two bid lines, then in each, selecting a trip (flight leg) and exchanging them. The exchanges were accepted according to the usual probabilistic threshold until, as temperature parameters were lowered, there were no new changes accepted.
It is not especially surprising that FedEx analysts chose simulated annealing as their optimization heuristic, nor that simulated annealing eventually served their needs successfully. The real lessons to be learned here are first to notice how very awkward the analysts found this real-world problem to be. The sheer number of constraints from federal agencies, labor organizations, company resources, and normal crew preferences, were a serious challenge that had not been adequately faced throughout the previous 20-year history of FedEx. Second, although simulated annealing appears on the surface to be a relatively straightforward heuristic, the practical implementation presented several hitches.
Some of the drawbacks of simulated annealing were anticipated. Performance is very sensitive to the control parameters and the annealing (cooling) schedule. Extensive experimentation was done to fine-tune the system, and the maximum number of equilibrations was finally set to 300 . Also, the heuristic can be fairly time-consuming to execute and there is no guarantee of optimal solutions. And because it generates potential changes randomly, it does not easily incorporate strategies for directed search. Nevertheless, despite these obstacles, some of the analysts had prior experience in using simulated annealing to solve problems in aircraft container loading and personnel and task scheduling, and they had great confidence in this heuristic method. Yet unanticipated difficulties followed.
The heuristic tended to produce too few valid lines and too much unassigned open time. This was remedied by tacking on a greedy algorithm (as a second pass after simulated annealing) to distribute open time into new lines (without modifying the high quality lines built during the annealing phase).

It was discovered that the initial heuristic did not give proper consideration to coordination of morning and afternoon trips, an important element in the minds of the pilots. The introduction of weighting factors addressed this problem satisfactorily.

One surprising observation was the critical importance of the initial solution in the behavior of the simulated annealing algorithm, which had previously been thought to be irrelevant and arbitrary. It became necessary to jumpstart the process by concocting initial lines by putting trips to the same first layover city on the same line, and making fewer lines.

There were other problems as well. The bid line generator was first built for the FedEx Boeing 727 fleet of aircraft. When initial implementations seemed stable, additional fleets were introduced, but the process then immediately yielded poor results. The problem was studied, and analysts found that the difficulty lay in the fact that different types of aircraft flew different length trips. When the process was tuned in favor of shorter trip aircraft such as Boeing 727 and DC10, the longer Boeing 747 flight legs became problematic. The solution to this issue involved some fundamental changes to the simulated annealing process based on categorizing the fleet according to average trip lengths.

It was also recognized along the way that the system needed additional data about its trips and lines that simply were not readily available. And some data files were found to be erroneous. A time consuming effort to upgrade the underlying databases proved necessary and beneficial, and taught the analysts to be extremely cautious about blindly assuming that input data files are complete and free of errors.

Finally, in this implementation, the simulated annealing process did not always converge at all. The churning behavior resulted when proposed changes having a net cost of zero were accepted, and the phenomenon was worst when a large proportion of the proposed changes had no impact on the objective function value but nevertheless involved complicated changes to the bid lines being constructed. No direct solution to this difficulty ever materialized, and the analysts viewed this as evidence of the limitations of any heuristic method in solving very complex real-world combinatorial problems.

Run times for the simulated annealing heuristic vary with fleet size, requiring 30 minutes for the smaller fleets and up to 10 hours of SPARCstation time for the largest (Memphis based) fleet. Churning can affect all of these run-times.

FedEx generally considers this system to be a valuable and practical analytical tool, which can automatically produce bid lines of a quality comparable to those produced laboriously by other methods. As is typical of many heuristic methods, simulated annealing clearly cannot build a tidy solution out of a messy problem, but it does appear to be a practical tool for effectively handling problems that heretofore could not be dealt with at all.
