# 1.4 OPTIMALITY AND PRACTICALITY


Everyone with a mathematical education has been trained to search for exact solutions to problems. If we are solving a quadratic equation, there is a formula which, if applied correctly, yields exact results, namely values that satisfy the equation. If a list of names needs to be sorted, we employ an algorithm that gets the list perfectly ordered. And if we need to find the maximum point in a continuous, differentiable function, we may be able to use the methods of calculus to find that optimal point. And certainly in the case of giving proofs of mathematical theorems, a respect for truth and perfection has been developed, and a nearly correct but incomplete or slightly flawed proof is of little or no value at all. Against this backdrop, the idea of solving a problem and not getting the right answer is indeed disappointing and disturbing. Yet there are justifiable reasons for accepting computational results that are imperfect or suboptimal.
First, it has already been pointed out that the models created by an analyst are not perfect representations of a system being analyzed. So, even if we could obtain exact solutions to the model, such solutions would not necessarily constitute exact solutions or perfect managerial advice to be applied within the real system. Hence, costly efforts to achieve perfect solutions to a mathematical model may not be warranted.
Contributing to the imperfection in our problem-solving endeavors is the use of automatic computing devices to assist in the calculations. The exact representation of real numbers requires the use of an arbitrarily large number of binary digits. However, the finite number of bits, sometimes known as word length, typically used for storing numerical values in computer memories implies that real numeric data values cannot always be represented exactly in computers. As an example, a correct representation of the value pi requires infinitely many digits, but we often settle for a truncated approximation using seven or eight significant digits (such as 3.141592 ) and tolerate the resulting inaccuracy in the results. This is known as round-off error, and after repeated calculations involving many inexact values, the accumulated round-off error can so distort the final results that they bear little resemblance to the pure theoretically correct answers that were anticipated. Hardware standards, such as the IEEE Floating-Point Standard, and results from the welldeveloped field of numerical analysis have provided analysts with tools to define, measure, and place bounds on the effects of accumulated computational errors, but being able to predict these errors does not necessarily suggest any method for avoiding or correcting erroneous results.
It is known that the data values associated with some types of problems, such as matrix problems and solving systems of equations, are inherently ill-conditioned, and certain computational procedures, such as matrix operations or iterative searches designed to converge to a solution, are inherently unstable. In some cases, although the algorithm underlying a solution process might be proven to yield optimal results, ill-conditioned problem data and numerical instability can practically preclude obtaining solutions of any reasonable quality. For further discussions on the successful use of numerical techniques
with computers, refer to any reputable book on numerical analysis, such as by Cheney and Kincaid (2013), Sauer (2011), and Wilkinson (1963).
Finally, the innate difficulty of some problems might suggest that accepting suboptimal solutions is the only practical approach. Problems whose algorithms take an exponential amount of computation time to guarantee a perfect, or optimal, solution leave us little alternative but to look for faster ways of obtaining solutions, even at the price of getting solutions of lesser quality. Suppose we are faced with the choice of expending an exponential amount of time (perhaps translating into centuries of computation time) to obtain an optimal result, or expending polynomial-time computational effort to obtain a solution that is adequate. In some cases, there may be a guarantee that the polynomial-time solution will be within some specified percentage of the optimal solution. In other cases, there may be no such guarantee, but perhaps experience has shown that in common practice the results are considered to be good enough for the context in which the solution is to be applied. Realizing also that the optimal result may be the solution to the wrong model, that the optimal result may be infused with round-off error, and that the data used as parameters might have been flawed and could have changed over time, a realistic analyst would probably feel completely justified in applying the polynomial-time algorithm to obtain a practical solution quickly, and feel no remorse whatsoever over having foregone the chance to obtain a slightly better solution. Given our very imperfect grasp on the concept and reality of perfection, the price of optimality-in this case and in many others-is entirely impractical.
Settling for solutions of merely good enough quality may at first seem to be an inexcusable lowering of one's standards and expectations. Yet in a complex and in some ways subjective world, compromise should not necessarily be seen as evidence of mediocrity. In the real world of imperfect models, precarious data, unavoidable numerical inaccuracies, and time constraints, insistence upon so-called optimal solutions may border on the compulsive. A rational analyst with a comprehensive view of the problem-solving process would prefer to spend a reasonable amount of time in search of good, practical solutions, and then proceed to put the results into practice to achieve the original goal of improving the performance or operation of the system being studied. Chapter 10 introduces some of the inspiration and influences behind solution methods that incorporate pragmatic approaches to solving difficult problems.
