# 8.6 Summary

Simulation techniques permit analysts to study the behavior or performance of systems by creating a computer based model or imitation of a real system or process operating over a period of time. Simulation further allows for experimental studies and analyses in a hypothetical context that would be too expensive or too dangerous to carry out in an actual system.

Building a simulation is itself a complex process. After a problem is formulated and a mathematical or conceptual model built, data must be collected that typifies the actual environment in which the simulated system operates. Modeling the activities of the real system and generating random events that could occur in the real system are among the most critical aspects of simulation development.

Simulation would be an arduous and impractical analysis to perform manually; therefore, the process is automated by developing computer programs to perform the simulation. Steps must be taken to ensure that these programs are correct and appropriate for the study at hand. After simulation experiments are designed, the simulation study enters its production phase, during which the scenarios of interest are carried out via execution of the computer program. Analysts observe the computer simulation and gather statistics to compose a comprehensive picture of various aspects of the simulated system's performance.

By simulating a system, it is possible to make observations of the performance of an existing system, to determine the operating characteristics of a nonexistent system, or to project modifications to an existing system.

## KEY TERMS

activities <br>
attributes <br>
collecting data <br>
coding <br>
discrete simulation <br>
entities <br>
event <br>
experimental design <br>
inverse transform method <br>
problem formulation <br>
production <br>
pseudorandom numbers <br>
simulation <br>
simulation models <br>
simulation-optimization <br>
system state <br>
validation <br>
verification <br>
