# 4.3.4 Set Partitioning/Covering/Packing Models


Many problems in combinatorial optimization include (as subproblems) partitioning a group of items into optimal subsets. For example, vehicle routing requires that we allocate customers to vehicles. Airline crew scheduling requires that we allocate flight legs to a crew. Municipal garbage pickup requires that we allocate specific street blocks to trucks. Each of these subproblems can be modeled in the following form as a set partitioning problem:

$$
\begin{array}{ll}
\text { minimize } & \sum_{\mathrm{j}} \mathrm{c}_{\mathrm{j}} \mathrm{x}_{\mathrm{j}} \\
\text { subject to: } & \sum_{\mathrm{j}} \mathrm{a}_{\mathrm{ij}} \mathrm{x}_{\mathrm{j}}=1 \text { for all } \mathrm{i}=1, \ldots, \mathrm{~m} \\
& \mathrm{x}_{\mathrm{j}}=0 \text { or } 1 \text { for all } \mathrm{j}
\end{array}
$$

where $\mathrm{a}_{\mathrm{ij}}=1$ if item i is included in (potential) subset j . Each column of the $\mathrm{m} \times \mathrm{n}$ constraint matrix A represents a feasible combination of items. For example, each column might represent the items that could feasibly be loaded into a truck for delivery to customers; or the items could be road segments that require garbage collection, and a column would represent a feasible route for a truck to pick up garbage. The cost $\mathrm{c}_{\mathrm{j}}$ represents the cost of delivering (or traveling, or producing) that subset of items. A variable $\mathrm{x}_{\mathrm{j}}=1$ if we decide to include that particular subset in our solution.
In the set partitioning problem, all of the items must be included exactly once. In vehicle routing, for example, we might typically require that exactly one truck travel to each customer. In a slightly different problem, the set covering problem, we require that each item be selected at least once. For example, in the garbage collection problem, and in the crew scheduling problem, every street (every flight leg) must be covered at least once; but it is also feasible to cover the same street (flight leg) twice, if this turned out to be the most efficient solution. (The second truck would not pick up any garbage, and the second flight crew would ride as passengers.) Set covering differs from set partitioning in that the constraints are " $\geq$ " inequalities instead of equalities.

The set packing problem describes another similar situation. In some production scheduling problems, we are given a list of orders, and we have possible subsets of orders that can be combined on different machines. In some cases, there may not be sufficient resources to satisfy all of the demand. The problem is to select the optimal subset of orders to maximize some profit function, $\mathrm{p}_{\mathrm{j}}$. This problem can be formulated as:

$$
\begin{array}{ll}
\text { maximize } & \sum_{\mathrm{j}} \mathrm{p}_{\mathrm{j}} \mathrm{x}_{\mathrm{j}} \\
\text { subject to } & \sum_{\mathrm{j}} \mathrm{a}_{\mathrm{ij}} \mathrm{x}_{\mathrm{j}} \leq 1 \text { for all } \mathrm{i}=1, \ldots, \mathrm{~m} \\
& \mathrm{x}_{\mathrm{ij}}=0 \text { or } 1 \text { for all } \mathrm{j}
\end{array}
$$

We select as many items as possible, but we are not allowed to process any items more than once. We will revisit this type of problem in greater detail in Section 4.8, where we discuss column generation
