# 8.2 DISCRETE SIMULATION MODELS


A computer simulation carries out actions within a computer program that represent activities in some real system being modeled. The purpose of the simulation is to make observations and collect statistics to better understand the activity in the simulated system and possibly to make recommendations for its improvement.

Simulations can be categorized as either discrete or continuous. This distinction refers to the variables that describe the state of the system. In particular, the variable that describes the passage of time can be viewed as changing continuously or only at discrete points in time. In models of physical or chemical processes, for example, we might be interested in monitoring continuous changes in temperature or pressure over time, and in that case a continuous simulation model would be appropriate. These models generally consist of sets of differential equations; the rate of change in each variable is dependent on the current values of several other variables. Examples include process control systems, the flight of an airplane, or a spacecraft in orbit continuously balancing the forces of gravity, velocity, and booster rockets.

On the other hand, in queueing systems, events such as customer arrivals and service completions occur at distinct points in time, and a discrete event simulation model should be chosen. Continuous simulation will be mentioned again in Section 8.4, and the topic is thoroughly discussed in many of the references cited at the end of this chapter, particularly Roberts et al. (1994). We will concentrate on discrete simulation models throughout the remainder of this chapter.
