# 8.2.1 Event-Driven Models


A simulation model consists of various components and entities. The dynamic objects in the system are called entities. Other main components include processes, resources and queues. In a customer queueing system, for example, the entities may be the customers. Each entity possesses characteristics called attributes. The attributes of a customer include the customer's arrival time and the type of service required by the customer. The servers would be characterized by the type of service they render, the rate at which they work, and the amount of time during which they are busy. Queue attributes would include the queue length and the type of service for which the queue is designated. Some attributes such as type of service required or work rate are set at the beginning of the simulation, while other attributes are assigned and updated as the simulation proceeds.

The system state is defined by the set of entities and attributes, and the state of the system typically changes as time progresses. Processes that affect the system state are called activities. An activity in a queueing system may be a customer waiting in line, or a server serving a customer.

Any activity in a simulation will eventually culminate in an event, and it is the occurrence of an event that actually triggers a change in the system state in a discrete simulation model. For this reason, certain discrete simulation models are referred to as event-driven models. Although other views such as process oriented simulation and object oriented simulation are found in some of the languages that will be described in Section 8.4, the event-driven view is probably the most widely used discrete simulation approach.

To track the passage of time in a simulation model, a simulation clock variable is initially set to zero and is then increased to reflect the advance of simulated time. The increment may be fixed or variable. One such time advance mechanism calls for repeatedly increasing the clock by a fixed unit of time, and at each increment, checking the system to determine whether any event has occurred since the last increment. The disadvantage of this mechanism is the difficulty in selecting an appropriate interval for the clock increment. If the interval is too small, a great deal of uninteresting and inefficient computation occurs as the clock is advanced repeatedly and no events have taken place. If the interval is too large, several events may have occurred during the interval and the precise ordering of events within the interval is not registered, since all these events are assumed to have taken place at the end of the interval. In this way, key information may be lost. Because systems are not necessarily uniformly eventful throughout the duration of the simulation (i.e., there will be busy times and quiet times), it is virtually impossible to choose the correct or best interval for incrementing the simulation clock throughout the entire simulation.

An alternative, and more popular, time advance mechanism is to allow the simulation clock to be advanced only when an event actually occurs. The bookkeeping required to maintain a list of events that will be occurring, and when they will occur, is straightforward. The mechanism checks the list to determine the next event, and advances the clock to the time of that event. The event is then registered in the simulation. This variable increment mechanism is efficient and easy to implement.

An effective way to learn just exactly what a computer simulation does is to work through a simulation manually. In the following example, we will perform an event driven simulation of a queueing system.

<ul/>

**Example 8.2.1**

The system we will simulate is one in which the customers are computer programs that are entered into a system to be executed by a single central processing unit (CPU), which is the service facility. As a computer program enters the system, it is either acted upon immediately by the CPU or, if the CPU is busy, the program is placed in a job queue or ready queue maintained in FIFO (first in first out) order by the computer's operating system.

The service facility (the CPU in this case) is always either busy or idle. Once in the system, the customer (computer program in this case) is either in a queue or is being served. The queue is characterized by the number of customers it contains. The status of the server, the customers, and the queue collectively comprise the state of the queueing system, and the state changes only in the event of an arrival or departure of a customer. The input data for this simulation example are given in Table 8.1.

The first program arrives for execution at time 0 . This event starts the simulation clock at 0 . The second program arrives four time units later. The third customer arrives one time unit later at clock time 5, and so forth. Program execution times are two, three, five, and so on, time units. A quick glance at the arrival and service times shows that in some cases a program is executed completely before its successor arrives, leaving the CPU temporarily idle, whereas at other times a program arrives while its predecessors are still in execution, and this program will wait in a queue.

Table 8.2 shows the clock times at which each program enters the system, begins execution, and departs from the system upon completion of execution. Notice that the CPU is idle for two time units between Programs 1 and 2, for three time units between Programs 5 and 6, and for five time units between Programs 6 and 7. Program 9 arrives

**TABLE 8.1** <br>
Arrival and Service Times

| Customer Number | Arrival Time | Length of Service |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 1 | 0 | 2 |
| 2 | 4 | 3 |
| 3 | 5 | 5 |
| 4 | 9 | 1 |
| 5 | 10 | 2 |
| 6 | 18 | 2 |
| 7 | 25 | 3 |
| 8 | 26 | 4 |
| 9 | 32 | 5 |
| 10 | 33 | 1 |


**TABLE 8.2** <br>
Simulation Event Clock Times

| Customer Number | Arrival Time | Time Execution Begins | Time Execution Completes |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 1 | 0 | 0 | 2 |
| 2 | 4 | 4 | 7 |
| 3 | 5 | 7 | 12 |
| 4 | 9 | 12 | 13 |
| 5 | 10 | 13 | 15 |
| 6 | 18 | 18 | 20 |
| 7 | 25 | 25 | 28 |
| 8 | 26 | 28 | 32 |
| 9 | 32 | 32 | 37 |
| 10 | 33 | 37 | 38 |


just exactly as its predecessor is completing, so there is no CPU idle time nor does Program 9 have to join the queue and wait. Programs $3,4,5,8$, and 10 must wait in the queue before beginning execution. Table 8.3 shows the chronological sequence of events in this simulation.

The primary aim of a simulation is to make observations and gather statistics. In this particular example, we will be interested in determining the average time programs spend in the system (job turnaround time), the average time spent waiting, the average number of programs in the queue, and the amount or percent of time the CPU is idle. We return to this example in Section 8.3.1 to illustrate making these observations.

Before continuing, however, we should note that the single server queueing system we have just observed fails in several respects to match the $\mathrm{M} / \mathrm{M} / 1$ model developed in Section 7.3. First of all, arrivals and service times were given deterministically in table form rather than being drawn from the more typical Poisson and exponential distributions. Second, the system was tracked through only ten customers and over a period of only 38 time units (probably a short time relative to the life of the system). Thus, because of the deterministic customer and service behavior and the short duration of the simulation, it would be unjustifiable to claim that these results are in any way typical of the

**TABLE 8.3** <br>
Chronological Sequence of Events

| Clock Time | Customer Number | Events |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 0 | 1 | Arrival and begin service |
| 2 | 1 | Departure |
| 4 | 2 | Arrival and begin service |
| 5 | 3 | Arrival and wait |
| 7 | 2 | Departure |
|  | 3 | Begin service |
| 9 | 4 | Arrival and wait |
| 10 | 5 | Arrival and wait |
| 12 | 3 | Departure |
|  | 4 | Begin service |
| 13 | 4 | Departure |
|  | 5 | Begin service |
| 15 | 5 | Departure |
| 18 | 6 | Arrival and begin service |
| 20 | 6 | Departure |
| 25 | 7 | Arrival and begin service |
| 26 | 8 | Arrival and wait |
| 28 | 7 | Departure |
|  | 8 | Begin service |
| 32 | 8 | Departure |
|  | 9 | Arrival and begin service |
| 33 | 10 | Arrival and wait |
| 37 | 9 | Departure |
|  | 10 | Begin service |
| 38 | 10 | Departure |


normal operation of the system. The most common way to overcome these deficiencies is to generate numerical values representing a large number of customers with random arrival patterns and service times. We require that these random values be representative of events and activities that occur in the real system. One mechanism for doing this is described in the following.

</ul>