# 4.2.1 General Integer Problems


An illustration of general integer programming can be found in a simple version of the portfolio selection problem. An investor wishes to purchase a portfolio of financial instruments that will provide a maximum expected return. Many investment products, such as on the futures market for example, must be purchased in large lot sizes. We can define variables $\mathrm{x}_{\mathrm{i}}$ to denote the number of units of security i in the portfolio. The objective function measures the expected return, and the problem will often have constraints limiting the amount of risk that the investor is willing to accept. In the simplest form of the problem, we could assume that the only constraint on the portfolio is a limit on the number of dollars that can be invested. Problems that have this basic underlying structure involve selecting as many investments as possible and figuratively packing them into a portfolio of limited size.

A three-dimensional view of this same idea is seen in a problem known as the cargo loading problem. Consider trying to pack boxes into trucks or shipping containers. The variables $\mathrm{x}_{\mathrm{ij}}$ represent the number of boxes of type i to be loaded into container j . The constraints for this type of problem are complicated because they must define a spatially feasible packing.
The employee scheduling problem can also be formulated as a general integer problem, in which we define a number of shift patterns for workers. For example, a pattern could be to have a person work the day shift on Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday, have two days off, and then work Saturday and Sunday evening. We then define variables $\mathrm{x}_{\mathrm{i}}$ to specify the number of employees who are assigned to work using pattern i . The objective is to minimize total salary costs while ensuring that there are sufficient employees available in each shift.
