# 4.2.3 Mixed Integer Problems


Section 4.1 introduced the problem of production planning at General Motors. In that problem, there are two sets of variables: it is necessary to decide which products are assigned to each plant, and then to determine production levels at each plant. We could define $0-1$ variables $x_{i j}=1$ if product $i$ is assigned to plant $j$. We might then define variables $\mathrm{y}_{\mathrm{ij}}$ to represent the number of units of product i to produce at plant j . If production levels are fairly high, we might treat the $\mathrm{y}_{\mathrm{ij}}$ variables as real valued, and round them to integers in the end. Additional constraints must prevent a product from being produced if it is not assigned to the plant. The problem can be modeled as a large mixed integer problem with both $0-1$ and real-valued variables.

A related problem involves warehouse location: given a set of potential locations for warehouses for a distributor, select the locations that will minimize total delivery costs.

We can define $0-1$ variables $x_{j}$ to have a value 1 if location $j$ is selected. Once it is decided which locations are going to be used, then we must solve some kind of a transportation problem to get the products from the producers to the warehouses, and from the warehouses to the customers. Real-valued variables $\mathrm{y}_{\mathrm{ij}}$ are defined to represent the amount of product transported from supplier i to warehouse j , and real-valued variables $\mathrm{z}_{\mathrm{jk}}$ denote the amount of product distributed from warehouse $j$ to customer $k$. The total cost is a function of the distances that the products must travel.
A further variation, which can be considered as a general version of warehouse location, is called the fixed charge problem. Suppose there is a fixed cost (with a $0-1$ variable) for opening a warehouse. Once the warehouse is open, the remaining costs are essentially continuous. There are a number of practical problems that lend themselves to this type of formulation. For example, when a telecommunications company installs fiber optic cable, there is a fixed cost for actually laying the cable, but then there is a real-valued cost corresponding to the capacity of the cable. This leads to a related problem called capacity planning.
