# 4.7.4 The Generalized Assignment Problem


Consider the generalized assignment problem which was introduced and formulated in Section 4.3.5. This problem is similar to the standard assignment problem, where we want to assign jobs to machines for example, except that, in this case, we can assign more than one job to the same machine subject to some capacity limitations.

The generalized assignment problem has a wide variety of practical applications. We could, for example, be assigning computer programs to a set of processors, or customer orders to a set of delivery vehicles, or university students to sections of a course. The capacity might represent a space restriction (in the truck) or a limit on total available time. The problem formulation can be written as follows:

$$
\begin{array}{ll}
\text { maximize } & z=\sum_{i=1}^{n} \sum_{j=1}^{m} c_{i j} x_{i j} \\
\text { subject to } & \sum_{j=1}^{m} x_{i j}=1 \text { for } i=1,2, \ldots, n \\
& \sum_{i=1}^{n} a_{i} x_{i j} \leq b_{j} \text { for } j=1,2, \ldots, m \\
& x_{i j}=0 \text { or } 1 \text { for all } i, j
\end{array}
$$

where there are $n j o b s$ and $m$ machines. The variables $x_{i j}=1$ if job $i$ is assigned to machine $j$. The payoff for assigning job $i$ to machine $j$ is $c_{i j}$. Each machine has a capacity $b_{j}$, and each job requires $\mathrm{a}_{\mathrm{i}}$ units of machine capacity. The first set of constraints forces each job to be assigned to exactly one machine, while the second set of constraints ensures that no machine has its capacity exceeded.

In the standard assignment problem, the size of each job and the capacity of each machine are equal to one. We have already seen in Chapter 3 that the basic assignment problem is
relatively easy to solve. Surprisingly, when we generalize the machine capacity constraint, we create an integer programming problem that is difficult to solve. The LP solution is not necessarily an integer solution.

A straightforward formulation of the Lagrangian is to move the capacity constraints into the objective function:

$$
\begin{gathered}
\mathrm{L}_{1}(\mathrm{x}, \mathrm{u})=\min _{\mathrm{u} \geq 0} \max _{\mathrm{x}=(0,1)} \sum_{\mathrm{i}=1}^{\mathrm{n}} \sum_{\mathrm{j}=1}^{\mathrm{m}} \mathrm{c}_{\mathrm{i} \mathrm{j}} \mathrm{x}_{\mathrm{ij}}-\sum_{\mathrm{j}=1}^{\mathrm{m}} \mathrm{u}_{\mathrm{j}}\left(\sum_{\mathrm{i}=1}^{\mathrm{n}} \mathrm{a}_{\mathrm{i}} \mathrm{x}_{\mathrm{ij}}-\mathrm{b}_{\mathrm{j}}\right) \\
\text { subject to } \sum_{\mathrm{j}=1}^{\mathrm{m}} \mathrm{x}_{\mathrm{ij}}=1 \text { for } \mathrm{i}=1,2, \ldots, \mathrm{n}
\end{gathered}
$$

When $\mathrm{u}_{\mathrm{j}}=0$, this problem is trivial to solve. We can consider each job independently, and simply put it on the best machine (with the highest $\mathrm{c}_{\mathrm{ij}}$ ). This solution will generally violate some of the capacity constraints, so we can increase the corresponding penalty terms, $\mathrm{u}_{\mathrm{j}}$, and construct a new simple problem with:

$$
\bar{c}_{i j}=c_{i j}-u_{j} a_{i}
$$

This penalizes placing all jobs on the machines whose capacities are exceeded. Now, we solve this new problem where we again place each job on the best possible machine using the values $\mathrm{c}_{\mathrm{ij}}$. Unfortunately, this formulation is a little too easy. The solution of the Lagrangian (in terms of x ) would give $0-1$ answers even if we solved it as an LP. Therefore, there is no integrality gap and the optimal Lagrangian function value will be the same as the LP function value for the original problem. The corresponding Lagrangian will not produce better bounds than the LP.
The same problem could also be formulated in the following way as a Lagrangian:

$$
\begin{array}{r}
L_{1}(x, u)=\min _{u} \max _{x=(0,1)} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \sum_{j=1}^{m} c_{i j} x_{i j}-\sum_{j=1}^{m} u_{i}\left(\sum_{i=1}^{n} x_{i j}-1\right) \\
\text { Subject to } \quad \sum_{i=1}^{n} a_{i} x_{i j} \leq b_{j} \text { for } j=1,2, \ldots, m
\end{array}
$$

This formulation can be interpreted as considering each machine separately. Initially, we start with $\mathrm{u}=0$ and assign the best possible jobs to each machine without violating the capacity restrictions. Each machine can be thought of as defining an independent knapsack problem. Although the knapsack problem is not as easy as the simple assignment solution that we used in the previous formulation, it is still a relatively easy problem in many practical situations.
The solution obtained will generally assign some jobs to more than one machine and other jobs will be unassigned, which are both infeasible because every job must be assigned to exactly one machine in any feasible solution. When a job $i$ is assigned to more than one machine, the corresponding penalty term will be positive and we can use a positive value of $u_{i}$ to penalize the Lagrangian. However, when a job $i$ is unassigned, the term will be equal to -1 , and we use a negative value of $u_{i}$ to penalize the infeasibility. Thus, we do not restrict $u_{i}$ to have a non-negative value.

In this formulation, if we solve the Lagrangian as an LP, we will get a fractional solution. In particular, each knapsack (machine) may have one fractional part of a job assigned to it. By solving the Lagrangian as a sequence of knapsack problems, we get an integer solution, and therefore, the problem will, in general, have an integrality gap. The integer restriction on the Lagrangian will decrease the objective function value. Hence, the Lagrangian will give a better upper bound than the standard LP bound.

This approach has been used successfully by Fisher et al. (1986) to obtain practical solutions to the vehicle routing problem, in which a given set of customer orders must be assigned to delivery trucks. Each order takes a fixed amount of space in the truck, and there is a capacity restriction on the size of each vehicle.
