# 8.4 SOFTWARE FOR SIMULATION


Simulation studies can be facilitated by a wide variety of software packages and languages. Specialized computer programming languages have been introduced over the past several decades to assist simulation analysts in the development and use of simulations of real systems. Simulation models have also been implemented in various traditional general purpose programming languages such as Fortran, C, C++, Java, and Python, among others. Simulations developed directly in general purpose, high level languages often execute
more efficiently than those implemented in specialized simulation languages. However, most analysts find that it is much more efficient and beneficial to use a special simulation language rather than to try to develop a simulation program from scratch. A competent analyst may lack extensive programming skill, and may prefer to concentrate instead on the system being modeled, using the most convenient tools possible.
Various criteria will determine an analyst's choice of a simulation language or software package. A first consideration is likely to be the analyst's own programming capabilities and whether a given language is easy to learn and complements the analyst's skills and experience. A non-programmer may choose a language that is easier to learn, has greater built-in support, and provides less flexibility, whereas a highly skilled programmer may be more adept at learning a language that gives him more power and flexibility; and this additional control permits the ability to model unusual systems in specialized applications. The nature of the system being modeled can also influence the choice of software; some systems allow the user to add customized subroutines to model non-standard types of activities.
Most simulation software products provide automatic mechanisms for collecting statistics, generating reports, and even debugging the simulation. Additional considerations may include the standardization or portability of the language among machines and other software environments. In this section we examine some of the features of several widely used simulation languages and software packages. Further information may be found in published surveys of simulation software (Swain 2017), which review and chart the capabilities of many software packages for simulation.
One of the earliest languages for simulating the dynamic performance of systems is GASP (General Activity Simulation Program), a collection of Fortran subroutines developed by Pritsker (1974). GASP subroutines support the development of event-driven and continuous simulations and require subroutines for system initialization, time advance mechanisms, scheduling future events, random variate generators, routines to collect statistics, and report generators. Most of these are supplied as a part of the GASP package; however, the programmer must create a main (driver) routine and fill in the details of initialization and event management.
SIMSCRIPT (SIMple-SCRIPT) was developed at the RAND Corporation during the 1960s and was originally an easy to use, Fortran based, system for discrete event simulation and modeling. Over time, the system underwent numerous revisions, evolving into a high level language available for most platforms, and capable of supporting event driven and process oriented simulations, with extensions for continuous simulations and can run on different platforms (Russell 1993, Rice et al. 2005).
GPSS (General Purpose Simulation System) was originally developed at IBM around 1960, and because of its early origin and ease of learning, was among the most widely used simulation languages, especially in the 1970s and 1980s (Schriber 1974, Gordon 1978, Solomon 1983). GPSS was then succeeded by GPSS/H with additional features and is typically applied to general queueing analysis, manufacturing, and scheduling and can be used under Windows platforms. The most modern version of GPSS is aGPSS which comes with a graphical user interface and can run on both Windows and Macintosh (See Schriber [1993] and Hendriksen [1993]).
ARENA is currently among the most widely used software packages for discreteevent simulation. It started as a command language SIMAN and then SIMAN became the engine around which ARENA was built as its Graphical User Interface which allows the user to drag and drop simulation objects and libraries. It includes input analysis and output analysis tools as well as simulation optimization add-in (OptQuest).

It is a general modeling language that is mostly used for process modeling and it works under Windows only at this point.

AnyLogic is a modeling environment that is written in Java and has become very popular in the recent years especially as it allows building not only discrete-event models but also agent based models and system dynamics models. Hybrid models of these three paradigms can also be developed using this object oriented modeling environment which runs on Windows, Mac and Linux.

FlexSim is another object oriented process modeling environment with an outstanding 3D animation capability. It is written in C++ and allows users to augment their models with C++ functional code if necessary. It includes ExpertFit for statistical distribution fitting and has analysis tools.

SAS is a widely used software system that provides support for large models and complex simulation experiments. The graphical user interface offers convenient tools for creating, executing and analyzing simulations. It integrates with SAS Simulation Studio for source data and for presenting results of simulation studies. It runs on Windows, Mac and Linux workstations.

Many simulation tools and development environments have emerged over the past 50 years and we recognize that we cannot explore all of them in this book. Additional examples of such packages include AutoMod, ExtendSim, ProModel, Simio, SimProcess, Simula8, and Witness. The reader is referred to the regularly published surveys of simulation software (Swain 1997, 1999, 2001, 2003, 2005, 2007, 2009, 2011, 2013, 2015, 2017), which review and chart the capabilities of many software packages for modeling and simulation. Many simulation languages and software packages had emerged and vanished over the years as more efficient, convenient, and powerful packages were developed. The reader can compare the surveys published by Swain over the years to see which ones have been removed from the list, and which are still on.

Furthermore, a list of open source and commercial simulation packages can be found on the Internet by running a quick web search. For example, a comprehensive list of simulation software is available on Wikipedia at https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ List_of_discrete_event_simulation_software.

In recent years, cloud computing has started to change the long standing tradition of having software installed locally on computers. Instead, software is installed in the cloud on servers hosted by computing farms, and users access the software application via web browser most of the time. It seems that this phenomenon is on its way to becoming the standard for most software systems, including simulation software. An example of this trend is ClouDES, a web based, cloud deployed, discrete event simulation platform developed at the Virginia Modeling, Analysis and Simulation Center (VMASC) at Old Dominion University. This cloud based system can be accessed via a web browser without the need to install simulation software on the client side. Instead, users can develop models and execute them through a web browser.

Because simulation studies have traditionally had the reputation of consuming a great deal of computer time for execution of large simulations, substantial amounts of research have been devoted to the development of technologies to use parallel computers to increase the execution speed of simulation programs. This effort has been accelerated and made easier by advances in computer technology where more processing power can now be packed in smaller computers, making it possible to run multiple parallel processors on the same machine. Despite the significant progress made in computer hardware and software, developing simulation models is still a time consuming process for developers and analysts starting with the conceptual development, to implementation and finally validation of simulations.
