# 4.2.2 Zero-One (0-1) Problems


Zero-one (0-1) problems are among the most common integer problems. All of the variables in the problem are required to take on a value of zero or one. Often, the variables have an abstract interpretation; they simply indicate whether or not some activity occurs, or whether or not some particular matching or assignment takes place.

One of the simplest $0-1$ examples is the capital budgeting problem. Suppose we have a number of possible projects from which we must choose. Each project has a known value, and requires some level of resources such as funding, space, time, or services. We define the variables $\mathrm{x}_{\mathrm{i}}$ to have a value 1 if project i is selected. The objective is to maximize total value subject to a constraint on total budget. (This problem at first appears to be another form of packing problem; but in this case, each project is to be chosen just once or not at all.)

Many scheduling problems can be formulated using $0-1$ variables. For example, in a production scheduling environment, we could define variables $\mathrm{x}_{\mathrm{ik}}$ to have a value 1 if job $i$ is assigned to machine $k$, and zero otherwise. Or we might define variables $y_{i j}=1$ if job $i$ immediately precedes job $j$ on an assembly line. We can then use these variables to develop constraints on the time available for resources, on due dates for individual jobs, and on total schedule costs.

A simple example of a scheduling problem is examination timetabling. Variable $\mathrm{x}_{\mathrm{ij}}$ is given a value of 1 if examination i is assigned to period j . Conflicts are not allowed, so constraints are included to prevent two examinations from being assigned to the same period if any students need to be present at both exams. Additional constraints may reflect limits on the number of exams per period, or the total number of seats in an exam location. The objective function must in some way measure the quality of a given timetable.

Another popular variation is the vehicle routing problem. Suppose that a fleet of trucks on a given day must deliver goods from a central warehouse to a set of customers. The objective is to minimize the total cost of making all deliveries. The cost is normally approximated based on minimizing the number of trucks used and the total mileage and/or total hours of delivery time. One common formulation of this problem defines variables $\mathrm{x}_{\mathrm{ijk}}$ to have a value 1 if customer i is assigned to truck j and is delivered immediately before customer k . Constraints are included to ensure that the assignment is feasible (perhaps based on the drivers' expertise, or on contractual agreements or regulations).

One of the most successful practical applications of integer programming has been in the airline crew scheduling problem. The airlines first design a flight schedule composed of a large number of flight legs. A flight leg is a specific flight on a specific piece of equipment, such as a 747 from New York to Chicago departing at 6:27 a.m. A flight crew is a complete set of people, including pilots, navigator, and flight attendants who are trained for a specific airplane. A work schedule or rotation is a collection of flight legs that are feasible for a flight crew, and that normally terminate at the point of origin. Variables $\mathrm{x}_{\mathrm{ij}}$ have value 1 if flight leg i is assigned to crew j . The objective is to ensure that all flight legs are covered at minimum total cost. Most of the major world airlines now use integer programming to assign crews to flight legs, and many claim to be saving millions of dollars annually in operating costs.

A distributed computing problem arises in a multiprocessor computing environment where the programs and data files must be allocated to various machines in different locations. Variables $\mathrm{x}_{\mathrm{ij}}$ have a value 1 if module i is assigned to processor j . The objective is to minimize the total execution costs (which may depend on the choice of processor) and communication costs (that are incurred when one processor needs to communicate with another).
