# 9.2.2 Maximax Strategy


For each alternative, $\mathrm{a}_{\mathrm{j}}$, pick the best possible outcome (the maximum). Choose the alternative which has the maximum value of this maximum.

The Maximax player represents the eternal optimist. Such people believe that anything they do will turn out right. They are gamblers by nature and are willing to take risks for a chance at the greatest possible prize. In the example, the maximum payoff of the first five strategies is given by $5,3,8,6$, and 7 , respectively. The maximum possible outcome is 8 , and the Maximax player will therefore select option $\mathrm{a}_{3}$ and hope for state $\Theta_{2}$.

This strategy is commonly identified with incurable gamblers who have an unrealistic or even unhealthy level of optimism. However, there is also a group of successful business people who regularly employ this strategy, but they do not rely on blind luck. These decision-makers will look for the best possible outcome, and determine the state(s) that must occur in order for the maximum profit to be realized. These people have great confidence in their ability to make things happen; they believe that they can influence and even control the state variables. There is often some truth in this when the decision involves the success of a new product, the potential market, and the ability of competition to react. Presumably, these people are using a modified form of Maximax in which they first eliminate any states that are unlikely or uncontrollable. They choose the maximum outcome corresponding to any state over which they believe they can exercise some influence.
