# 1.3 ALGORITHM EFFICIENCY AND PROBLEM COMPLEXITY


An algorithm is a sequence of operations that can be carried out in a finite amount of time. An algorithm prescribes a process that may be repetitive in some sense (perhaps iterative or recursive), but that will eventually terminate. Practical examples of algorithms include recipes for cooking, the instructions in an owner's manual for connecting a new sound system component, and computer programs that do not contain infinite loops. Algorithms are the processes that software developers put into action when they create computer programs for solving all kinds of problems.
In the 1930s, a mathematician by the name of Alan Turing developed a general computational model (which now bears his name) that is powerful enough to represent all possible numeric and symbolic computational procedures. Turing also demonstrated the existence of problems for which no algorithms exist that successfully handle all possible instances of the problem. Such problems are called unsolvable or undecidable problems. (It had been previously assumed that an algorithm could be developed for any problem if the problem-solver were merely clever enough.) Some of the earliest problems to be classified as unsolvable were of only theoretical interest. However, more recently, other more practical unsolvable problems have been identified.
When such problems do arise in actual practice, we might just try to deal with special or limited cases, rather than with the general problem. Special cases of unsolvable problems, perhaps involving highly restricted inputs, may not be unsolvable, and therefore it may be entirely possible to design algorithms for these cases. Alternatively, we might find it fairly simple to use human ingenuity (a very poorly defined talent that cannot be easily automated) to deal with individual problem instances on a case-by-case basis.
While unsolvable (or undecidable) problems do exist, most analysts would prefer to concentrate on the many important solvable problems that face us; that is, problems for which algorithms can be developed. With this in mind, the next question to arise might be: are all solvable problems of similar difficulty, or are there some that are truly more difficult than others? What is meant by a difficult problem? And just what is known about algorithms, and the complexity (or computational behavior) of algorithms? This is a topic of study that has undergone enormous progress during the past several decades, and the advances that have been made in this field have provided valuable concepts, notations, and tools that allow for discussion and analysis of an algorithm's performance.
Several factors influence the amount of time it takes for a computer program to execute to solve a problem: the programming language used, the programmer's skill, the hardware used in executing the program, and the task load on the computer system during execution.

But none of these factors is a direct consequence of the underlying algorithm that has been implemented in software. Given a particular algorithm, its performance is strongly dependent on the size of the problem being solved. For example, we would expect a sorting algorithm to take longer to sort a list of 10,000 names than to sort a list of 100 names. Similarly, we recognize that solving a system of equations takes longer when there are more equations and more variables. For this reason, the performance of an algorithm is often described as a function of a variable denoting the problem size, which denotes the size of the data set that is input to the algorithm.
During the early years of the discipline of Operations Research, relatively little was understood about the formal properties of algorithms and the inherent complexity of problems. However, the 1970s and 1980s witnessed remarkable developments in this area. Two interesting classes of problems have been defined. One class of problems (called class P) contains those problems that can be solved by an algorithm within an amount of computation time proportional to some polynomial function of problem size; that is, the problems are solvable by polynomial-time algorithms. The other class (called class NP for nondeterministic polynomial time) contains problems that may require the computation time to be proportional to some exponential (or larger) function of problem size; these algorithms are called exponential-time algorithms. For a more precise description of these problem classes, based on the notions of deterministic and nondeterministic Turing machines, refer to any elementary textbook on algorithms or theory of computation, such as Cormen et al. (2009), Baase and Gelder (2000), Manber (1989), and Hein (1995).

Within the class NP, there is another special class of important problems called NP-complete, which are characterized as being the most difficult problems in NP. This class includes many very practical problems and so has received considerable attention from analysts. Another class of NP problems, known as NP-hard, are at least as hard as the hardest NP problem. Some of these NP problems, and their practical applications, are described in Chapters 3, 4, and 10.
The problems in class P are generally considered to be easy problems-not necessarily in the conceptual sense but in the sense that efficient algorithms for these problems exist that execute in reasonably small amounts of computation time. NP-complete and NP-hard problems, in contrast, appear to require computation time that grows as an exponential function of problem size. This implies that unacceptably large amounts of computation time could be required for solving problems of any practical size, and therefore such problems have been termed intractable problems. Solutions for such problems are not necessarily difficult to conceptualize or even to implement in computer code, but the execution time may be completely unaffordable-both physically and financially.
It is known that $\mathrm{P} \subseteq \mathrm{NP}$, but it is an open question whether $\mathrm{P}=\mathrm{NP}$. In other words, are the NP-complete problems truly more costly to solve than the problems in P , or have analysts just not yet been clever enough to discover efficient algorithms for these apparently difficult problems? Discovery of an efficient (polynomial-time) algorithm for any NP-complete problem would be sufficient to establish that $\mathrm{P}=\mathrm{NP}$ and, therefore, that all the NP-complete problems can be solved efficiently. In the absence of any such discovery, analysts are faced daily with the need to solve practical problems that are computationally intractable. Chapter 10 reveals how some of these problems are dealt with in effective and affordable ways. An informative overview of this subject is available in Garey and Johnson (1979).

Most of the problem models presented in this book are not intractable, and the solution methods for these problems are based on polynomial-time algorithms. These methods find optimal solutions in an amount of time proportional to a polynomial function of the
problem size. Depending on the nature of the data (e.g., the distribution of data values or the arrangement of the data values in the data set), the execution time for a given algorithm may vary. Sorting a list of 10,000 names that are already in order may take less time than to sort 10,000 names that are scrambled-if the algorithm is sensitive to the initial ordering and can take advantage of it. Similarly, finding the best solution to a system of equations may be rather easy if a reasonably good solution is already known.
Thus, we will see that, under different circumstances, the same algorithm may require an execution time that is a different function of problem size. If so, which of these different functions should analysts use to characterize the performance of the algorithm? There are several possibilities: the most favorable (fastest) case, the average case, or the most unfavorable (slowest) case.
To help phrase an answer to this question, special notations have been developed that facilitate describing the computation time required to execute an algorithm to completion. For this particular purpose, we do not want to try to capture specific information about how an algorithm is implemented (programmed), or on what type of computer it is to be executed; rather, we should focus on the algorithm itself and, in particular, the step count, or the number of steps inherent in carrying out the algorithm. For some purposes, one might want to characterize the best case performance of an algorithm (the fewest number of steps that it could ever need under any circumstances). Best case might be the choice of an optimist, but using this as an indicator of algorithm performance could be misleading; and in any case, this is rarely indicative of what analysts need to know in order to assess the dependable performance of the algorithm. For example, multiplying two $ n\times n$ matrices generally takes time proportional to $\mathrm{n}^{3}$; but of course, if one of the matrices is the identity matrix, this could be discovered in only $\mathrm{n}^{2}$ steps (inspecting each element of the matrix) and the rest of the process could be omitted. Using the function $\mathrm{n}^{2}$ to describe the step count, or run-time, of a matrix multiplication routine does give an accurate measure of this best case, but it is not generally indicative of the time required for matrix multiplication.

An algorithm's average case performance may seem to be the most practical characterization because it indicates the typical, or expected, step count. It would certainly be useful to know the most likely amount of time required to execute an algorithm. However, because such an analysis must be based on statistical assumptions about the nature, order, or distribution of the data on which the algorithm operates, the validity of such assumptions may be on shaky ground for any particular set of data. Indeed, the expected performance may never actually be observed for any given set of input data. In addition, the statistical analysis that must be carried out in order to characterize an algorithm's average behavior is often quite a mathematically difficult analysis.

The characterization of an algorithm that is both straightforward and often of greatest practical value is the worst case performance, that is, the greatest number of steps that may be necessary for guaranteed completion of the execution of the algorithm. For this purpose, we introduce big-Oh notation, which is written as $O(\mathrm{f}(\mathrm{n}))$ and pronounced "big Oh of f of n ," where n denotes problem size and $\mathrm{f}(\mathrm{n})$ is some function of problem size. The meaning of the notation is as follows. An algorithm is said to be $\mathrm{O}(\mathrm{f}(\mathrm{n}))$ if there exist constants c and $\mathrm{n}_{0}$ such that for all $\mathrm{n}>\mathrm{n}_{0}$, the execution time of the algorithm is $\leq \mathrm{c} \cdot \mathrm{f}(\mathrm{n})$. The function $\mathrm{f}(\mathrm{n})$ is the algorithm's worst case step count, measured as a function of the problem size. The constant c is called a constant of proportionality and is intended to account for the various extraneous factors that influence execution time, such as hardware speed, programming style, and computer system load during execution of the algorithm. The problem size threshold $\mathrm{n}_{0}$ accounts for the fact that for very small problem sizes, the algorithm may not reveal its characteristic worst case performance. Paraphrased, the definition given above
may be stated as follows: To say that an algorithm is $\mathrm{O}(\mathrm{f}(\mathrm{n}))$, or "of order $\mathrm{f}(\mathrm{n})$," means that for large enough problem sizes, the execution time is proportional to at most $\mathrm{f}(\mathrm{n})$.
Thus, a matrix multiplication algorithm is $\mathrm{O}\left(\mathrm{n}^{3}\right)$ because the process may take $\mathrm{n}^{3}$ steps, although the algorithm could be programmed to look for special input forms that may in certain cases permit completion of the task in fewer than $\mathrm{n}^{3}$ steps. Some algorithms may operate in such a way that their worst case performance is also the best case; the performance of such algorithms does not vary depending on the nature of the data, but, of course, does vary with problem size.

There are even some algorithms whose performance is independent of problem size, and therefore not really dependent on any function of problem size n (e.g., retrieving the first item in a list takes the same amount of time regardless of the length of the list). If we need to describe the worst-case performance of such an algorithm, we could use the notation $\mathrm{O}(1)$, where $\mathrm{f}(\mathrm{n})$ is just the constant function 1 . Where appropriate throughout this book, the big-Oh notation is used to describe the worst case performance of the algorithms that are presented.
Many of the methods studied in this book are based on algorithms whose complexity functions range from $n, n^{2}, n^{3}$, up to $2^{n}, n!$, and $n^{n}$. To give an idea of the relative growth rates of these functions as n increases, Table 1.1 shows indications of function values. Instead of raw numeric values, we can impose a more practical interpretation and assume that the function values $\mathrm{f}(\mathrm{n})$ denote the step count of some algorithm, and that each step can be executed in 1 second on a computer. The entries in the table can then be viewed as estimates of actual amounts of the computation times required to apply algorithms of different complexities to increasingly larger problems of size n . The great differences that are evident between the polynomial functions and the exponential functions are quite dramatic, and the execution times for the exponential algorithms are indeed staggering.
In practical applications, problem sizes may well range into the hundreds of thousands, and we will encounter a number of important practical problems for which the only known algorithms have worst case complexity that is exponential. It is obvious from the table that such exponential-time algorithms are completely useless for solving problems of any reasonably large size. Given this dilemma, what are the options? It is pretty clear that, for these types of problems, faster hardware does not offer an immediate solution; CPU chips whose processing speeds are doubled, or even increased by several orders of magnitude, will not make a dent in these formidable execution times. Until some theoretical breakthroughs come to the rescue that suggest new algorithms for solving such problems, we

TABLE 1.1
Computation Times
| f(n) | $\mathrm{n}=10$ | $\mathrm{n}=20$ | $\mathrm{n}=50$ | $\mathrm{n}=100$ |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| n | 10 s | 20 s | 50 s | 100 s |
| $\mathrm{n}^{2}$ | 100 s | $400 \mathrm{~s} \approx 7 \mathrm{~min}$ | $2,500 \mathrm{~s} \approx 42 \mathrm{~min}$ | $10,000 \mathrm{~s} \approx 2.8 \mathrm{~h}$ |
| $\mathrm{n}^{3}$ | $1,000 \mathrm{~s} \approx 17 \mathrm{~min}$ | $8,000 \mathrm{~s} \approx 2 \mathrm{~h}$ | $125,000 \mathrm{~s} \approx 35 \mathrm{~h}$ | $1,000,000 \mathrm{~s} \approx 12 \mathrm{~d}$ |
| $2^{\mathrm{n}}$ | $1,024 \mathrm{~s} \approx 17 \mathrm{~min}$ | $1,048,576 \mathrm{~s} \approx 12 \mathrm{~d}$ | $1.126 \times 10^{15} \mathrm{~s} \approx$ 350,000 centuries | $1.268 \times 10^{30} \mathrm{~s} \approx 10^{21}$ centuries |
| n! | $3,628,800 \mathrm{~s} \approx 1$ month | $2.433 \times 10^{18} \mathrm{~s} \approx 10^{9}$ centuries | $3.041 \times 10^{64} \mathrm{~s} \approx 10^{55}$ centuries |  |
| $\mathrm{n}^{\mathrm{n}}$ | $10^{10} \mathrm{~s} \approx 300 \mathrm{yr}$ | $1.049 \times 10^{26} \mathrm{~s} \approx 10^{17}$ centuries | $8.882 \times 10^{84} \mathrm{~s} \approx 10^{75}$ centuries |  |


may have to settle for using methods that do not solve the problems perfectly, but which yield acceptable solutions in an affordable amount of computation time. This may seem to be a disappointing direction to follow, but the discussion in Section 1.4 might provide convincing arguments in defense of suboptimal solutions.
