# 3.9.2 Multiprocessor Network Traffic Scheduling (Bianchini and Shen 1987)


In the design of real-time signal processing computer systems, one of the most important issues is the efficient scheduling of data communication traffic among special-purpose processing elements. For example, certain types of digital filters can be implemented on a small set of specialized functional modules, and the determination of filter functionality lies in the specification of intermodule communication.

The process of mapping consists of first placing functional data operators onto processing elements. This is easily accomplished using well-known placement algorithms.

The second and more difficult phase of the problem is the design of the network data traffic. This requires routing each unit of traffic onto a path of network links between the source and destination processing elements, with the objective of maximizing the aggregate flow of network traffic that can be maintained in a system.

Traffic management is viewed as a multi-commodity fluid flow problem. The multicommodity aspect arises because of the need to maintain the identity of data traffic between different source/destination pairs, although the traffic may simultaneously occupy the same data link. An optimal traffic pattern is obtained when a cut set of saturated links is formed.
The network formulation results in an extremely large linear program because of the exponential number of network paths that contribute explicitly to the size of the problem. An alternative is a policy iteration method that successively improves current traffic patterns by re-routing certain data units. To improve a traffic pattern, under-utilized paths are determined between each source/destination pair, and then it must be decided whether re-routing along the proposed new path is cost-effective. To do this, a minimum spanning tree for the network is found. It can be shown that the least cost path connecting any two nodes in a network lies on the minimum spanning tree. Therefore, if a minimum spanning tree is known, the traffic scheduler can examine each processing element adjacent to a saturated link, and if traffic can be re-routed away from the saturated link and onto a minimum spanning tree link, then the cost of the traffic pattern can be reduced, while at the same time smoothing congestion and perhaps creating capacity for flow of additional data.
