# 3.9.3 Shipping Cotton from Farms to Gins (Glover et al. 1992; Klingman et al. 1976)


At a time when cotton production had decreased by $50 \%$ in the Upper Rio Grande River Valley of Texas and New Mexico, it was necessary to determine how best to utilize the processing capacity available in the area's 20 cotton gins. Analysts began by mapping the 150 farms producing cotton, and charting the distances to the gins that were scattered throughout the Valley.
The efficiency of the industry had been brought into question because of the excess ginning capacity that resulted from the decrease in cotton crop production. Local farmers and gin operators had resorted to individual, fragmented decisions and actions that did not contribute to overall prosperity or profitability in the region. A mathematical model was constructed that represented the entire system, with the hope that a comprehensive approach would encourage joint cooperation among all farmers and gin operators.
Because of the excess gin capacity, there were fears that some gins may have to close down and, indeed, such reductions were found to contribute favorably to profitability. Gin operation involves annual fixed charges to activate the gin, such as electrical connections, cleaning, and salaried personnel. Variable costs of operation then include regular time and overtime labor costs. If the regular shift capacity of a gin is consumed, any additional cotton must be processed at the overtime rate; but this use of the more expensive overtime capacity can be justified if it avoids the fixed activation costs of starting up an additional gin.
The problem was first viewed as a shipping cost problem, to identify the particular gin that should service each farmer's needs. But it was quickly discovered that the real issue
was the need to quantify the utilization of the cotton gins. This information could provide justification for some tough decisions related to the closing of certain gins which simply could not operate economically. The model grew into a fixed-charge transshipment formulation that included:

<ul/>
Production levels at each farm <br>
Shipping costs from each farm to each gin <br>
Holding costs for storing cotton at each farm <br>
Seasonal gin activation costs <br>
Two levels of operating capacity at each gin <br>
</ul>

The network model initially involved around 5000 nodes and over 2 million arcs, but refinements reduced this to around 100,000 arcs. The solution indicated that substantial cost savings (a $20 \%$ reduction in ginning costs) could be achieved by closing some gins and working as a cooperative. Implementation was allowed to evolve over several seasons in order to obtain the full cooperation of all the farmers and gin operators in the region.
