# 3.8 SOFTWARE FOR NETWORK ANALYSIS


Many network problems can be solved with software developed for ordinary linear programming problems. But more specialized software for network problems has been developed that takes advantage of the distinctive structure of network formulations, and can be used to solve network problems very efficiently. Real network problems may involve hundreds of thousands of nodes and millions of arcs, and fortunately there is software available for solving such large problems on a variety of hardware platforms. Some of the more noteworthy ones are mentioned here.
IBM CPLEX Optimization Studio has a network optimizer available through a callable library for various platforms.
SAS/OR OPTNET is a system for analyzing various characteristics of networks and solving network optimization problems and related models having network-structured data. This software handles general assignment problems, performs critical path analysis, determines minimum cost network flows, finds shortest paths, and solves transportation problems. It performs cycle detection and analyzes connectivity in networks, and does project scheduling and resource-constrained scheduling. OPTNET interfaces with OPTMODEL, described earlier in Chapter 1.
TransCAD is an integrated system of Geographic Information System (GIS) and transportation modeling capabilities, designed to help transportation professionals plan, organize, manage, and analyze transportation data. It offers a complete toolbox of analytical methods for mapping, assignment, site location, minimum cost distribution, transportation, vehicle routing and scheduling, planning, logistics, and marketing. TransCAD supplies state-of-the-art data collection tools for accessing data from the Global Positioning System (GPS).
COIN-OR, the open source OR software website (www.coin-or.org), offers software tools for network optimization. Sifaleras (2015) summarized these tool into Coin Graph Classes (Cgc), the Efficient Modeling and Optimization in Networks (LEMON), and VRPH. Cgc is a collection of network representations and algorithms aiming to facilitate the development and implementation of network algorithms; LEMON is a C++ template library providing efficient implementations of network optimization algorithms and common graph structures; and VRPH constitutes an open source C++ package in a software library containing tools to create metaheuristic algorithms for the Vehicle Routing Problem.
Mascopt (Mascotte Optimization) is an open source project that provides a set of Java-based tools for network optimization problems to help implementing solutions to network problems by providing a data model of the network and the demands, libraries to handle networks and graphs, and ready to use implementation of existing algorithms or linear programs. It also provides some graphical tools to display graph results. For more detail, Lalande et al. (2004).
Google-OR Tools provides open source solvers for network flow problems in its graph libraries.
Finally, More and Wright (1993) published a guide to optimization software that included descriptions of older computer programs including network optimization software such as GENOS, LNOS, LSNNO, NETFLO, and NETSOLVE.
