# 3.9 ILLUSTRATIVE APPLICATIONS

## 3.9.1 DNA Sequence Comparison Using a Shortest Path Algorithm (Waterman 1988; Wagner and Fischer 1974)


A problem that arises frequently in the field of cell biology is the comparison of DNA sequences and the analysis of how one sequence is transformed into another. A sequence is a finite succession of symbols from a finite alphabet. In the case of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), sequences are composed from the set of nucleotide bases, denoted \{A (adenine), C (cytosine), G (guanine), T (thymine)\}. Although biologists are not in complete agreement over the mechanisms by which one DNA sequence evolves into another, it is generally assumed that the transformation consists of a series of the following types of changes:

1. Insertion of a character (nucleotide)
2. Deletion of a character
3. Substitution of one character for another

The similarity between two DNA sequences $S$ and $T$ can then be measured by assessing a cost for each of these three types of changes, and then finding the least expensive transformation of $S$ into $T$. The cost corresponding to this transformation is called the evolutionary distance from DNA sequence $S$ to DNA sequence T.

Transitions can be modeled by defining a node to represent a DNA sequence, and creating other neighboring nodes to represent all DNA sequences obtainable from the original one by making one of the three types of changes. Arcs are labeled with the cost of the change. Then a shortest path algorithm applied from the original node to any other desired node will yield the evolutionary distance between the two DNA sequences.

DNA sequences are quite long (millions of nucleotide bases), so for practical implementations, parallel computer hardware known as systolic architectures have been developed for research purposes. This approach involves a specialized spatial arrangement of processors and an appropriate flow or pulsing of data among the processors, in order to obtain the desired computational results much more quickly than could be achieved using general-purpose computing hardware. For further discussion of systolic architectures incorporating shortest path and other network based algorithms, refer to the work of (Lopresti 1987). A completely different but effective approach to this problem is based on dynamic programming methods; see Wagner and Fischer (1974) for a detailed description of this concise solution to the DNA sequencing problem.
