# 4.10.3 Propane Bottling Plants (Sankaran and Raghavan 1997)

During recent years, the importation, bottling, and distribution of liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) in India has transitioned from a government-controlled operation into a privatesector enterprise. Two major import and storage facilities (ports), already in place, provide supplies of LPG. Industrial customers acquire LPG in bulk directly from these locations, but the needs of other domestic residential and commercial establishments are supplied through a network of dealer agencies. Customers use LPG contained in cylinders, and when empty, these cylinders are picked up by dealers and replaced by filled cylinders. Each dealer town must have a bottling plant where empty cylinders can be replenished for future distribution to customers.
Because the sources of LPG and the customer market are already established, the problem was to determine the pattern and mechanisms for distributing LPG from the two storage facilities to the customers. Tanker trucks can transport LPG from the source to dealer locations for bottling, but it is also feasible to operate mobile bottling plants. Considerations for mobile operations include not only capital investment and operating and distribution costs, but also public safety and firefighting capabilities at all intermediate storage points.
Strategic decisions for dealer and bottling facility location are complicated by the fact that any necessary future increases in capacity at a given location can be undertaken only if such increases are provided for in the original layout. Thus, a significant portion of expansion costs are incurred during original construction, although the payoff from such expansion will not be realized until the projected market growth actually takes place.
The problem facing the Shri Shakti company is optimally locating the bottling plants, determining the long-run size of each facility, and projecting the target date at which each facility will commence operating at full (expanded) capacity. The integer programming model used for this problem involves about 400 dealer towns and 2,500 constraints, and seeks to minimize total cost of operations in the target year. Costs include:

- Fixed annual costs that are independent of volume throughput at the plants
- Costs of transporting LPG from the two ports to the plants
- Cost of bottling
- Costs of transporting bulk and cylinder LPG and empty cylinders among bottlers, dealers, and customers

Determining the amounts of LPG to be distributed through the network dictates the location and size (capacity) of each proposed facility. Complicating the problem were uncertainties about competition, corporate takeovers, market growth, and initially some inaccuracies in data defining the distances between sites.
A solution to this problem was developed using a linear programming-based branch-and-bound method. Subsets of the problem were originally solved in which the subproblems were defined by geographical or political boundaries. Combining these separate solutions, however, often resulted in certain customers being served by distant in-area suppliers instead of by closer plants just across a boundary. In order to remedy this inefficiency, a novel and indirect method was designed for solving the full-scale problem. Specially tailored software routines in Fortran were linked to extended versions of LINDO software for mathematical programming.
Analysts working on this application created a well formulated model, developed a comprehensive and accurate database, and engaged in illuminating discussions with Shri Shakti's board of directors, government advisors, and financial experts during development of these solutions. The credibility of the resulting model and the proposed solutions provided a much-needed foundation for successful planning, negotiating, and funding for this newly privatized industry in India.
