# 4.10.2 Timber Harvest Planning (Epstein et al. 1999)


The Chilean forestry industry consists primarily of large private firms that own pine and eucalyptus plantations and are vertically integrated, comprising pulp plants, sawmills, and paper market operations. Short-term harvest scheduling (over a three-month period) amounts to matching stands of timber, of a given age and quality, to market demands that are typically defined by the length and diameter of each piece of timber. The process of cutting harvested trees into products having required lengths and diameters is called bucking. Bucking sequences are expressed in terms of lengths to be cut from timbers of decreasing diameters.
Different types of harvesting equipment are used in different terrains. Steep slopes require towers or cables, while flat areas can be harvested using tractors or skidders. In either case, bucking can be done on the ground and the resulting pieces transported to their respective destinations, or entire logs can be delivered to a central location for bucking. Transportation costs (which can include road building costs) play a significant role in the decisions that select timber from a certain origin and assign it to a destination.
Determining an optimal harvest plan is a difficult combinatorial problem that involves selecting mature timber stands available at specified locations, and assigning them according to product demand; obtaining optimal bucking patterns to utilize the timber itself in the most valuable way; and minimizing transportation costs, subject to the firm's harvesting equipment limitations and trucking capacities.
A principal component of the harvest plan is the specification of optimal bucking patterns, from among exponentially-many possible patterns. The solution is based on an LP model, and incorporates a branch-and-bound approach using column generation to create the bucking sequences. In the branch-and-bound tree for generating bucking patterns, a path from the root node to the bottom of the tree represents a bucking sequence; the terminal node in the tree represents the product (a piece of timber having a certain diameter cut to required length); and the terminal node's level in the tree denotes the product's position in the bucking process.
The column-generation technique improved the harvest value by $3 \%$ to $6 \%$ over the fixed bucking patterns that had been in use previously when harvest planning was done manually by experienced human planners. Furthermore, transportation costs were cut substantially when the model solution revealed the savings that could be obtained by bucking and shipping directly to market destinations rather than transshipping through intermediate central bucking locations.

Other applications of operations research in the Chilean forestry industry include systems for:

- Scheduling trucks among timber stands, mills, and destination ports.
- Selecting stands for harvest, and partitioning the timber for logs, sawtimber, and pulpwood, using mixed integer LP models.
- Determining the optimal placement of harvesting equipment and the optimal locations of access roads within the forest.
- Long-term planning over a 50 -year horizon to maintain steady and consistent supplies of timber, which involves the purchase, sale, and rental of timber lands; choosing appropriate silviculture regimes for different plantations; and planning for mills and other industrial processing plants.
