# 3.6 DYNAMIC PROGRAMMING


Dynamic Programming is an approach to solving mathematical programming problems by decomposing a problem into simpler, interdependent, subproblems, and then finding solutions to the subproblems in stages, in such a way that eventually an optimal solution to the original problem emerges. Because this approach has been used particularly for applications that require decisions to be made dynamically over time, the descriptive name dynamic programming has come into common use. However, this procedure is applicable to any problem that can be dealt with as a staged decision-making process.

In most of the optimization problems that we have seen thus far, all of the decision variables have been dealt with simultaneously. Arbitrarily complex interactions among decision variables are precisely what make general mathematical programming problems difficult. However, many problems have a structure that allows us to break the problem into smaller problems that can be dealt with somewhat independently. As long as we are able to preserve the original relationship among the subproblems, we may find that the total computational effort required to solve the problem as a sequence of subproblems is much less than the effort that would be required to attack all components of the problem simultaneously.

Unlike linear programming and other specialized mathematical programming formulations, dynamic programming does not represent any certain class of problems, but rather an approach to solving optimization problems of various types. Because the procedure must be tailored to the problem, the successful application of dynamic programming principles depends strongly on the intuition and talent of the analyst. Insight and experience are required in order for a problem-solver to perceive just how (or whether) a problem can be decomposed into subproblems, and to state mathematically how each stage is to be solved and how the stages are related to one another. Exposure to a large number of illustrative dynamic programming applications, including discrete and continuous variables, probabilistic systems, and a variety of objective function forms, would be required in order to provide truly useful and comprehensive insights into the craft of dynamic programming. Even then, it must be admitted that many problems simply do not lend themselves efficiently to the dynamic programming framework.

We will examine some examples, and in the process we will also describe some of the unifying themes and notations of the dynamic programming approach. For further exposure to this problem-solving tool, refer to the discussions by Bellman (1957), Nemhauser (1966), Beightler (1976), and White (1969).
