# 9.7 ILLUSTRATIVE APPLICATIONS
# 9.7.1 Decision Support System for Minimizing Costs in the Maritime Industry (Diz et al. 2014)


International maritime transportation is responsible for shipping the majority of commercial goods in world trade transport. Because crude oil and its derivatives account for approximately one third of this total cargo, scheduling the global fleet of petroleum tanker
ships is a critically important component in managing the cost of this huge transportation enterprise. The ship scheduling process involves allocating tankers from a given fleet to a set of cargoes, with the aim of minimizing costs. Significant academic research efforts over many years have resulted in the creation of new mathematical models, with details adequate to represent realistic situations, and new algorithms to optimize the ship scheduling models. However, the system described in this section is somewhat unique in that it is one of the few research studies which demonstrates a substantial and successful application of such analytical tools to control costs in actual industry ship scheduling problems.
In this application, we will see both the details and the broad scope of a successful decision support system. The development and implementation of this decision support system encompasses the difficulty of collecting reliable and critical data, the use and adaptation of powerful optimization techniques, the initial resistance of human experts to accept new methodologies, and the eventual inclusion and integration of the new decision support system into traditional corporate processes. The use of this decision support system provided a comprehensive approach for minimizing costs without compromising the service level standards set by the company. Moreover, the implementation of the new system also represents a turning point for this large corporation in the use of analytical support tools which ultimately fostered stronger cooperation among engineers, researchers, and managers.
The large multinational energy company Petrobras is a prominent player in global petroleum transport. Over a long period of time, Petrobras worked with a long-haul ship scheduling system to handle both importing and exporting crude oil for Brazil through numerous ports in five continents. In their system, the logistics department received information about cargoes when they were acquired or traded, and this data were constantly updated as cargoes were exchanged in open trade. The cargoes are defined by a narrow range of standard volumes of approximately a million barrels. Export cargoes must be loaded at ports on the Brazilian coast and transported to discharging ports in various parts of the world. The complicated pattern of importation and exportation involves transport both into and out of Brazil as dictated by Petrobras and customer supply demands.
The scheduling operation at this company assigns vessels to cargoes which are to be loaded, transported, and discharged. The size of the cargoes is consistent with the capacity of the Suez Max class of ships in their fleet. The assignment is subject to commercially negotiated time frames and operational constraints at ports and underway, and aims to minimize overall transportation costs. Petrobras maintains a fleet consisting of long-term chartered ships. For economic reasons, the capacity of this semi-permanent fleet is less than what is usually required for transporting all the cargoes. It is therefore routinely necessary to engage extra vessels on a per voyage charter basis in order to meet immediate demands for moving cargoes.
The scheduling process in use was practical, being based on the expertise gained through experience. For example, one heuristic rule used by the schedulers was to attempt to avoid idle time of long-term chartered ships; another strategy tried where possible to assure that a ship underway is loaded with cargo so that ships are used efficiently and not traveling empty unless necessary. The schedulers manually chose what they considered to be efficient routes. However, the methods employed merely generated several alternative feasible schedules, from which a few could be manually compared and selected based on low cost. The process did not produce an optimal minimum cost schedule.

Because of the very high and increasing costs anticipated in the maritime transport industry, the company undertook a thorough study of its long haul shipping operations
for the transportation of crude oil. Until 2012, skilled and experienced schedulers manually carried out the ship scheduling processes, but the company hoped that a careful study would reveal cost savings that could be achieved by an automated decision support system (DSS) that would largely take over the scheduling process, and that would also evaluate and report the actual economic advantage of implementing the improved scheduler.

The study resulted in the creation of a DSS that provides a minimum cost schedule for transporting a set of cargoes on a given fleet of ships. The new system systematically verifies and confirms or updates all the original input data pertinent to a schedule, such as operational costs, unexpected restrictions, changes in vessel speed or capabilities, port circumstances, distances, freight rates, vessel availability and location, and cargo characteristics. Once the DSS determines a minimum cost schedule, any of the earlier unexpected changes can occur, and must be incorporated to produce a new feasible schedule.

The DSS operates as follows. First, an algorithm is applied to generate a complete set of feasible schedules based on the most recently updated cargo, fleet, and port data. The method used for this is to generate all possible routes for the cargoes that adhere to the specified loading and unloading times in port; then to match each route to a time chartered vessel, adding voyage chartered ships if needed. A cost is then computed for each route to vessel assignment; that is, the total cost for each voyage (which includes ship operating cost, port taxes and fees, and current market freight rates). Next, the DSS uses the previous set of voyages and costs as input parameters for an integer programming model, formulated to minimize the overall cost for the entire fleet. An efficient commercial solver based on the AIMMS optimization platform with CPLEX is then used to solve the integer programming problem, thus yielding the minimum cost fleet schedule.

The integer programming model in this case was a straightforward formulation, using binary decision variables to denote whether vessel v is assigned to route r; and other binary decision variables to flag an idle vessel or a cargo that will have to be assigned to a voyage charter vessel and thus not assigned to any time-chartered ship.

The DSS was thoroughly tested, then fully implemented, with positive outcomes including an average $7.5 \%$ savings representing hundreds of millions of dollars in costs. Furthermore, the new system solved more complex and complete problem models, and did so within measured computation times of approximately five seconds. With this new DSS, the importance of acquiring accurate data and the ability to deal with unforeseeable restrictions, mechanical degradations and weather conditions were recognized as being critical. In this respect, a key factor was the interaction between the user and the system that included the skillful and experienced manual schedulers to handle changes that could not always be dealt with during execution of the DSS. This interaction created a healthy environment of cooperation and promoted acceptance of the new system by Petrobras employees. The schedulers had, through experience, acquired a rich understanding of many subjective aspects of ship scheduling. Their ability and willingness to integrate their knowledge in dealing with last minute changes in the scheduling environment contributed significantly to the successful implementation of the DSS and to continued improvements in the economics of marine transportation.
