# 1.6.3 Mining and Social Conflicts (Charles 2016)


Peru has become one of the best performing economies in Latin America during recent years. Peru's model of economic growth has been driven by its mining industry and the associated potential for remarkable productivity. This country contains approximately $22 \%$ of the world's silver, $13 \%$ of copper reserves, and smaller but globally significant percentages of zinc, lead, tin, and gold reserves. Productivity is high, with Peru being the world's third largest producer of copper, silver, and zinc.
Although investment commitments in mining operations increased and reached over $\$ 40$ billion during the period 2011-2016 to support a portfolio of mining projects, there have nevertheless been delays or lapses in implementing many of the projected mining activities. The delays have frequently been related to uncertainties involving social issues and conflicts. Local community concerns seem to be centered around environmental issues such as contamination of land and water, and the failure to improve everyday services such as health and education for the local populations. Local communities had anticipated greater benefits and services to accrue from the lucrative mining industry, but were disappointed by the lack of actual and apparent improvements in their daily living. Peru's wealth of natural mineral resources did not seem to have transformed and enriched the social and environmental structure nor brought to Peruvian communities the general prosperity that had been hoped for.
Poor communication and a perceived mismatch between mining priorities and social concerns led to conflicts that have resulted in the inability of some mines to continue operations. Through the years, many attempts were made to resolve conflicts, including forcing consultation between indigenous communities and the mining industry concerning infrastructure impact prior to mine development. It became evident that the various parties held vastly divergent perspectives on underlying problems. As an example, some Peruvian communities view the land as sacred, so any disturbance or relocation due to mining activities is considered a sacrilege and yet seems to be an inevitable aspect of any possible economic development.
Interactions among conflicting parties were mired in a complex mixture of misunderstandings, ambiguities, uncertainties, and insensitivities, so that attempts at meaningful communication and cooperation were often unsuccessful. Expectations and perceptions were so unclear or at cross-purposes that goals and objectives could not be well defined. The traditional mathematical modeling tools and established practices of Operations Research were useful only for studying specific and narrow avenues for progress in rather small contexts, but proved ineffective in addressing and overcoming most of the larger and more difficult issues.

With initiatives from the CENTRUM Católica Graduate Business School, some reasonable approaches were defined and followed to try to deal with the unstructured aspects of the dilemma. It had been generally assumed that mining companies that were perceived as having a more socially and environmentally responsible position were less likely to be involved in social conflicts, but analysts initially found little hard data to support or clarify this perception. Mining firms file corporate social responsibility (CSR) reports annually or periodically over many years, but the content of these reports had not been analyzed to determine the companies' actual commitment and discipline in adhering to the stated strategies. The job of reviewing the huge volume of accumulated reports was overwhelming, but the challenge was addressed by CENTRUM in collaboration with Cornell University. This team of researchers cooperatively devised machine learning approaches to extract data from the CSRs for analyzing and profiling the mining companies' practical commitment to sustainability. Preliminary results of this analysis proved to be an extremely important first big step toward matching actual practice with the ideals of sustainability.

In an effort to better understand and address socio-cultural issues, these analysts identified the following constituencies whose positions needed to be heard:

- Local communities and their needs for water, land, and respect for their cultural values
- Mining and associated industries and companies
- Government and state organizations
- Environmentalists with credible environmental constraints assisted and advised by technical innovation centers which included experts in Operations Research

Perhaps for the first time, researchers were able to take actions to help define and state the needs, expectations, goals, and tolerances of each of these constituencies. A platform was created for stating and discussing each group's ideals, and for comparing ideals versus currently existing conditions. By formally allowing and facilitating interaction among the various parties involved, it became possible to encourage cooperative analysis of feasible and desirable changes that could be made in the mining industry.

Conflicts based on uncertainty and misunderstandings were now being replaced by meaningful discussions aimed toward structuring and realistically conceptualizing the problems and goals expressed by both the mining companies and the local communities. With better understanding all around, and with well founded expectations for continued further progress, it is hoped that future collaboration will lead to formulating new models for solving the technical problems in operations, economics, social order, and sustainability for the development of Peru's natural resources.
