# 1.6.2 Humanitarian Relief in Natural Disasters (Battini et al. 2014)

Humanitarian relief operations play an increasingly important role in a world stressed by population growth, urban residential density, natural resource use and depletion, global warming, and economic and political factors. Urgent humanitarian needs occur in places where food, water and medical supplies are constantly in demand, requiring routine and sustainable distribution of supplies to save lives and mitigate human suffering. In such situations, analysts regularly study available data to assess the needs, identify sources for supplies, evaluate transportation options, and plan for timely and predictable delivery of appropriate supplies to the most critically vulnerable and to those most urgently in need.
Even greater logistical challenges are presented when natural disasters occur (Wex et al. 2014). Earthquakes, floods, hurricanes, tsunamis, and fires, for example, often cause sudden and immediate injuries and loss of life, destruction of basic shelter perhaps requiring evacuation and relocation of victims, and interruption of normal availability of food and supplies. And in just such circumstances, relief operations may be seriously hampered: analysts may have only limited access to reliable information with which to identify the locations where rescue crews are needed, the extent of injury and destruction, the status of resources and supplies, and the usability of various modes of transport. Communications,
water, and basic elements of infrastructure may have fallen prey to the disaster, and local decision making may have become impossible. Managing and executing the logistics of an efficient humanitarian supply chain in response to emergency needs arising from natural catastrophic destruction is an enormous and complex challenge.
In 2010, Haiti experienced a devastating earthquake that measured 7.2 on the Richter scale. Casualties were high with approximately a quarter of a million people killed and an even greater number of injured survivors. More than half of government and school buildings in Port-au-Prince and in the south and west districts of the country were destroyed or damaged. Financial loss related to the quake exceeded Haiti's entire 2009 gross domestic product. Overall, nearly 3.5 million people were affected by this catastrophic event.
Relief efforts typically begin by dispatching emergency rescue units into the areas of destruction, with the aim of reducing casualties and identifying longer term needs. Indeed, relief teams arrived in Haiti from various agencies such as the United Nations, International Red Cross and Red Crescent, the World Food Programme, and UNICEF. Their immediate focus was on delivering temporary shelter such as: blankets, tents, tarpaulins, and mosquito nets; food kits and water cans; and sanitation/hygiene kits.
The Haitian transport infrastructure was reported to have been very weak even before the earthquake hit, therefore delivering supplies through uncharted damaged areas to the earthquake victims was a difficult challenge. A plan to distribute relief supplies had to be devised, but as is often the case in the humanitarian field, data was incomplete or non-existent. A preliminary step in providing humanitarian aid is to find a means of collecting data, defining the type, extent, and locations in need of help, assessing the status of communication and transportation systems, and identifying sources capable of providing food and supplies and knowledgeable emergency staff personnel.
Pre-existing road network data were helpful in identifying all available routes and the current condition of roads. And from an inventory of available fleet vehicles (trucks and helicopters), it was possible to determine the cost of operation of each type of vehicle, which ones were undamaged, where they were currently located, and estimates of the time required for each type of vehicle to follow each available route.
Through cooperation among the agencies, food kits and hygiene kits were packaged in containers of the same size and shape for ease of transport, storage and delivery. Although food supplies were provided by different agencies than were the hygiene supplies, the uniformly shaped kits could be efficiently stacked and mixed together arbitrarily on the different types of delivery vehicles as needed.
Research analysts had already developed an elaborate network routing model to describe the logistics of general distribution processes, and this previous work was successfully amended to address the Haitian disaster requirements. The purpose ultimately is to find the best and most efficient possible way to deliver supplies to meet the needs of disaster victims; and this was accomplished by varying the type and number of vehicles allocated to achieve the lowest cost distribution plan. Further modifications to the model allowed for consideration of changes in the availability of supplies at their source (based on when and how much assistance could be mustered by the international agencies) and changes in the expected number of people assisted for each delivery to a given location.
Based on the acquired data, the demand for supplies, and the operational constraints, a mathematical model was developed, and was optimized for the Haitian earthquake scenario. The complex problem described in this way was then expressed in a special form
using the GAMS modeling system, and was solved with CPLEX software executed on an Intel-based PC running Windows 7. The computational results were then interpreted by analysts, and a distribution plan was created to guide the efficient and effective delivery of food and supplies.
Analytical approaches have been applied to some extent in the past to create workable distribution systems. However, modern research to significantly improve the effectiveness and efficiency of relief operations is relatively recent. Although every natural disaster presents its own characteristic details, it has been shown here that the modeling and computational tools developed in basic Operations Research can be adapted to the specific needs of distributing available supplies for humanitarian relief in the wake of a natural disaster.
