# 7.5 ILLUSTRATIVE APPLICATIONS

## 7.5.1 Cost Efficiency and Service Quality in Hospitals (Green 2002)


An important factor in evaluating cost efficiency in hospitals is the average percentage of beds that are occupied in a hospital, known as the average bed occupancy level. This measure has been for many years the criterion that most often determines bed capacity decisions in U.S. hospitals. The original aim of occupancy level targets has been to manage the supply of hospital beds, limiting the number of unoccupied beds and thereby controlling costs. A widely adopted occupancy target is $85 \%$. Even with such high occupancy levels, health policy planners, government officials, and hospital administrative decision makers have reacted to this figure with the perception that there were too many hospital beds (an average of say 15\% unoccupied beds), a situation which they interpreted as a costly and therefore unpopular over-supply of medical resources.

The issue of facility utilization is a complex one. Major changes in health care networks, insurance plans, shorter hospital stays, more outpatient procedures, and fewer inpatient admissions all require a careful reconsideration of efficiency in hospital resource utilization. But based on the measure of average bed occupancy levels, decision makers continue to infer that there is an excess of hospital beds which contributes to high and ever-increasing health care costs. Decisions to reduce the total number of beds in a hospital, or in a specialized unit within a hospital, were almost always based on the long-established measure of average occupancy level targets, which seemed simple to understand and easy to compute, but which inevitably influenced human nature and led to reductions in bed count. Pressure to be more cost-efficient led some managers and administrators to set occupancy targets higher than $90 \%$.

However, a closer look into the broader decision process reveals that the well-meaning but narrow focus on cost efficiency often detracts from much-needed attention to patient service performance quality. Analysts began to look more seriously at the delays experienced when patients cannot be provided with an appropriate bed as needed, either upon initial arrival at a hospital unit or for example when a patient is transitioning from a surgery unit into a recovery unit. Queueing analysts have studied bed unavailability in particular at intensive care units (ICUs) at hospitals in New York state (Green 2002). These hospital units serve the most critically ill patients, and the cost per day is several times as much as for regular inpatient units because of the technology and highly skilled staff required for treatment and monitoring patients. The analysts began with the assumption that standards and practices should be in place that provide the ability to place patients
in beds appropriate to their needs without unsafe or unreasonable delays; that is, the purpose of a hospital or unit is to provide appropriate and timely care to patients. Little data had been accumulated to support this study, and furthermore, it was quickly recognized that there were several ill-defined and poorly understood issues and concepts raised by the analysts that directly affected the quality of patient care, and that deserved some preliminary discussion before decision factors could be analyzed.
First of all, the beds themselves are characterized as being of a special type officially approved for a specific need, such as for inpatient use, outpatient use, fitted with telemetry or other technological capabilities. Certain specialized beds may be certified but not necessarily staffed with appropriately trained personnel; thus, availability of such a bed depends on the specific needs of an arriving patient.

Next is the question of what is meant by the term occupied bed. Hospital census is typically taken at midnight for billing purposes. But a census at that hour of the day usually measures the lowest occupancy of the day. Patients may arrive or depart for day treatment procedures. This day use may not be shown as contributing to the average bed occupancy level, even though each patient did in fact occupy a bed for the duration of the stay. In addition, few procedures are scheduled for weekends and holidays, which may have the effect of shifting the patient load to other days. Thus, daily average occupancy level is not a simple and perfect indicator of bed utilization.
For their study of cost efficiency and service quality, analysts proceeded to construct an M/M/s queueing model to describe systems having a single queue, patients arriving according to a Poisson distribution, exponential service times (bed occupancy times), unlimited queue length, and s identical servers (beds appropriate to the hospital or unit). This model was chosen because of its simplicity and tractability, as system performance problems need to be solved quickly; and this model required only data that was already publicly available.
Measures of performance efficiency and effectiveness in such systems include the probability that an arrival has any wait; that is, the probability of delay. These systems have the property that greater occupancy levels cause longer delays for service; and also relatively small increases in occupancy level can cause very large increases in delays. In general, larger service systems can operate at higher utilization levels than smaller ones in achieving the same level of delays, and indeed it was noted that smaller hospitals or units such as might be located in rural areas may need to operate using lower occupancy levels in order to provide good service. When system utilization is high, queueing delays are highly sensitive to even temporary increases in arrival rates. Rural units are often small units, so are particularly stressed by surges in the arrivals.
When the ICUs in the state of New York were analyzed, the average occupancy levels were $75 \%$ in the units studied. This could be seen as indicating under-utilization of the beds in these units, but the results of applying the M/M/s queueing study shed some light on the delays associated with this average occupancy level. The probability of delay depends on size s (number of beds) and server utilization. The queueing study revealed that over $90 \%$ of the ICUs currently had too few beds and were unable to achieve a proposed goal of a $1 \%$ probability of delay. And at half of the ICUs being studied, beds were over-utilized and even the less ambitious goal of a $10 \%$ probability of delay could not be reached. So, even at the relatively low average occupancy level, these facilities were far from being able to achieve low probability of delays for their patients.
We have seen that patient service quality should include avoiding delays in providing the patient with a bed. To emphasize the importance of the delay probabilities, let's consider the consequences of there not being a bed available. It has been observed that there
are increasing numbers of hospitals turning away arriving patients in ambulances, diverting them to other hospitals, due to lack of available beds. There are increases in the time patients spend in emergency rooms and hallways while waiting for a bed. Bed unavailability is a reality, and long delays and over-crowding are reported routinely. Patients experiencing delays may become agitated or uncomfortable, or they may be in urgent need of critical treatment. Therefore, not surprisingly, there is no standard definition of an acceptable delay.

In the study of the New York ICUs, average length of stay was nearly 18 days, so if a delay is encountered, it is likely to be a long delay (awaiting the departure of an existing patient). This could lead to high incidence of ambulance diversions or even to adopting the practice of bumping a current occupant to a different unit (likely one with fewer critical care resources, less telemetry, or lower level of staffing). Clearly, delays can result in poorer service and care of patients. But adding more beds to enlarge the facility is costly, and the acquisition of excess beds is often criticized even though patient service may be improved.
The quantitative results of an M/M/s queueing study provided health experts and managers valuable data to support decisions about increasing or decreasing the size of the facility. But in addition, fruitful discussions produced several common sense ideas that also proved effective and relatively inexpensive. Whereas certain ICUs may need more beds in order to deliver good service performance, there may be other units in the same hospital that have too many beds. It may be possible to reallocate beds among units as needed. Another practical solution may be to keep overflow beds on hand and hope that they can be staffed when the need materializes. As a further example, the Province of Ontario in Canada has a province-wide system known as CritiCall that keeps track of ICU bed utilization in 150 hospitals. When ambulances are looking for available beds, they call CritiCall and take their patients to the recommended location that has available beds. This improves bed capacity by increasing the relative size of the individual hospitals and spreading the risk of a shortage of beds.
Cross-training nurses or re-purposing selected telemetry equipment could also be possible, especially in large hospitals; done considerately, temporarily increasing the staff might increase patient satisfaction and peace of mind. Management should creatively investigate various options for improving operational efficiency. Goals should respect service performance standards and clinical care quality rather than cost alone.
Queueing analysis has been shown to be one very important aspect of evaluating and improving the efficiency and effectiveness of health care systems. Analysis of delays and the needs for equipment and staff can also be applied in many other areas such as telecommunications, airlines, and agencies providing police, fire, ambulance and other emergency services. In each case, analytical results of queueing studies can help to identify problems and establish a balance in cost of service vs. customer delays and consequences.
