# 7.5.3 Nurse Staffing Based on Queueing Models (De Véricourt and Jennings 2011)


The analytical tools of Operations Research have long been used to study and improve health care delivery systems, principally through better management of available resources such as facilities, staff, and supplies in order to provide healthcare services to patients. A great deal of study has addressed specifically how best to manage and utilize the critical skills of nurses. One very important aspect of managing nursing care focuses on establishing appropriate nurse staffing levels; that is, determining just how many nurses should be on staff at any given time in medical units such as hospitals and clinics. A commonly used guideline for nurse staffing is to use the ratio of nurses to patients, which is to set a minimum number of nurses that should be on staff in a hospital that currently has a given number of patients. Advocates of the ratio policy concept seem to believe that good patient outcomes can be achieved simply by increasing nursing ratios, although this position deserves further formal investigation.

California, for example, made a move toward enacting laws to enforce nurse-to-patient ratios in hospitals. But in practice, state policies for nurse staffing levels were influenced by the state health department, hospital administrators, and representatives of nurses unions, all of whose conflicting perspectives on the issue required negotiated compromises not consistent with any documented unbiased analysis. Managing patients' diverse and often unpredictable needs and controlling delays in nurses' response to patients is actually quite a complex problem, and simple ratio guidelines are now known to be inadequate in practice.

Recent research has involved the development of a queueing model to help establish policies for nurse staffing that are efficient and that also meet performance expectations for medical units. In this approach a medical unit is modeled as a closed M/M/s//n/FCFS queueing system in which s nurses serve a fixed-size population of n patients. The exponential arrival and service distributions are commonly used in hospital capacity planning and policy making, and these are considered to be valid assumptions for purposes of this particular study. Arrivals into the system represent patients who will be either in a stable state or in a needy state. A stable patient becomes needy after an exponentially distributed time interval with mean $1 / \lambda$. A needy patient is served in first-come first-served order by a nurse who attends to the patient for a service duration that is exponentially distributed with mean $1 / \mu$, whereupon the patient reverts to a stable condition.

The purpose for developing this model is to determine how many nurses should be present in the medical unit at any time. In this context, the performance of the medical unit is defined in terms of the probability of excessive delay, that is, the probability that
the delay between a patient becoming needy and the arrival of a nurse to administer care exceeds a given time threshold T. (It is generally agreed that excessive delays are related to the possibility of adverse events.)
The M/M/s//n/FCFS queueing model permits a sophisticated calculation of the likelihood that a needy patient waits for a time longer than T before being attended to by a nurse. The mathematics underlying this result represents an advanced and elegant extension of the single server probabilities of waiting, which were presented in Section 7.3 of this book, and the calculations are based just on the values of $\mathrm{s}, \mathrm{n}, \lambda$, and $\mu$. Nurse staffing, in this context, consists of finding the minimum staffing level that guarantees a certain bound on the probability of excessive delays.
The queueing model and related analyses in this research are aimed at providing safe service for patients. It is recognized that in any given medical unit, it would be desirable to introduce various additional considerations. For example, nurses may be qualified and certified to offer different levels of care, nurses may have different types and amounts of experience, nurse's service to a needy patient may have to be interrupted in favor of a more urgent need and replaced by a different nurse who completes the service, and so on. All of these complications contribute to the difficulty of analyzing nurse staffing policies, and certainly illustrate the need for guidelines that improve broadly upon the simple ratio rules that have been used in many nurse staffing applications.
The robust queueing system derived in this research provides a framework within which the previous variations can be considered and in which some of the underlying statistical assumptions concerning patient transitions and service times can be relaxed. Experience with this and related queueing models will inevitably raise new issues in healthcare coordination that will require healthcare system decision makers to address new questions, such as:

- How does a given time threshold value T ultimately influence the actual quality of care offered in specific types of medical units? And at what cost?
- What kind of response time constitutes an acceptable level of safety for various types of patients?
- What are appropriate scheduling policies for assigning individual nurses to specific shifts and duties, given a particular level of nurse staffing in a medical unit?

Queueing analysis provides valuable analytical tools that can be used to design effective and efficient healthcare facilities and services. However, more comprehensive studies to assess performance characteristics in actual or proposed health care systems often make use of Simulations, a topic that will be introduced and discussed in Chapter 8 of this book.
