# EXERCISES


10.1 One of the recurring themes in Operations Research is how best to explore a range of possible actions in pursuit of well-defined goals. The use of heuristic search methods has been suggested. Define the term heuristic search. and indicate why such methods are attractive.

10.2 Develop a local improvement technique for the knapsack problem described at the beginning of this chapter.

<ul/>

a. Design several possible methods for creating initial feasible solutions.

b. Develop a method for computing the objective function value for a current solution.

c. Design an exchange or swap technique, using a random number generator to select the items to be swapped. For each proposed exchange, compute the new objective function to determine whether to accept the change. Decide how many iterations of this exchange step you think would be necessary for a knapsack problem with n objects.

</ul>

10.3 Implement your design in Exercise 10.2 by developing a computer program.

<ul/>

a. Demonstrate the results by running your program on a problem instance with $\mathrm{n}=17$ objects to be considered for a knapsack having a capacity of 3,876 . The weights and values of the objects are shown in Table 10.12.

b. Try different numbers of iterations of the exchange process, such as 100 , 1,000, and 10,000. Chart the improvements in the objective functions that take place throughout the execution of your algorithm, and determine how many

**TABLE 10.12** <br>
Knapsack Data

| Object Number | Object Description | Weight | Value |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 1 | Life raft | 800 | 900 |
| 2 | Shark knife | 050 | 550 |
| 3 | Sun shades | 010 | 475 |
| 4 | Reef runners | 240 | 850 |
| 5 | Canteen | 080 | 600 |
| 6 | Iodine pills | 350 | 350 |
| 7 | OR book | 738 | 900 |
| 8 | Gnat spray | 548 | 290 |
| 9 | Nylon cord | 310 | 500 |
| 10 | Carrot cake | 200 | 010 |
| 11 | Firewood | 300 | 800 |
| 12 | Solar blanket | 850 | 215 |
| 13 | Dried apricots | 490 | 285 |
| 14 | Parachute | 500 | 630 |
| 15 | Space suit | 300 | 320 |
| 16 | Alien bane | 480 | 850 |
| 17 | Dry matches | 150 | 400 |


iterations is a reasonable number. Would $1,000,000$ iterations improve the quality of solution obtained by your algorithm?

</ul>

10.4 Reconsider Exercise 10.2b. Is it necessary to recompute the objective function at each local improvement step? Refine your program so that objective function reevaluations are as simple as possible.

10.5 Design and implement an algorithm that exhaustively enumerates all feasible packings of n objects in a knapsack having a given capacity. Use the results obtained from this algorithm as a benchmark to gauge the quality of the solutions generated by your exchange heuristic.

10.6 Design a simulated annealing heuristic algorithm for the knapsack problem. Use your local improvement exchange heuristic, and modify it so that it probabilistically accepts bad exchanges.

<ul/>

a. Design a cooling schedule for your algorithm. What should be the initial temperature parameter? By what amount should this parameter be reduced after each equilibration? At what temperature should the annealing process cease?

b. Apply your algorithm to the knapsack problem data shown in Table 10.12.

c. How many exchanges actually take place at each temperature? How many exchanges take place at the coolest temperature?

</ul>

10.7 Compare the local improvement heuristic and the simulated annealing heuristic on the basis of the computation time required for each method to execute and the quality of the solutions obtained by each method.

10.8 Design a local improvement heuristic technique for solving the traveling salesman problem described at the beginning of this chapter. For purposes of this exercise, assume that we wish to find the least costly tour from city 1 through all the other cities and back to city 1.

<ul/>

a. Design a method for establishing an initial tour.

b. Develop a method for computing the objective function for a given tour.

c. Design a swap or exchange mechanism for local improvements, involving just two cities. After each proposed exchange, compute the change in the objective function value.

</ul>

10.9 Implement your traveling salesman problem heuristic, and apply it to the problem instance with $n=10$ cities, in which the cost of traveling from city $i$ to city j is shown as the entry in the i -th row and j -th column of the following cost (or distance) matrix.


| 0 | 99 | 45 | 55 | 10 | 15 | 86 | 90 | 33 | 41 |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 97 | 0 | 10 | 15 | 18 | 93 | 56 | 23 | 84 | 75 |
| 88 | 22 | 0 | 35 | 46 | 57 | 68 | 79 | 99 | 90 |
| 75 | 64 | 53 | 0 | 14 | 63 | 74 | 77 | 54 | 20 |
| 32 | 53 | 64 | 86 | 0 | 97 | 94 | 91 | 90 | 10 |
| 24 | 35 | 46 | 57 | 68 | 0 | 98 | 96 | 95 | 99 |
| 55 | 79 | 26 | 10 | 96 | 65 | 0 | 35 | 49 | 22 |
| 30 | 50 | 80 | 50 | 86 | 53 | 81 | 0 | 28 | 65 |
| 35 | 57 | 26 | 11 | 14 | 76 | 25 | 89 | 0 | 30 |
| 40 | 50 | 60 | 23 | 41 | 11 | 18 | 90 | 47 | 0 |

10.10 Modify your traveling salesman heuristic, replacing the exchange mechanism by a subtour reversal mechanism. Use a random number generator to select the endpoints of a subtour of cities, and then create a new tour with that subtour reversed. Compute the objective function value associated with this new tour, and accept the new tour if it is an improvement over the previous one.

10.11 Extend your algorithms from Exercises 10.9 and 10.10 to include possible acceptance of a new tour having a worse objective function value than that of the previous tour.

<ul/>

a. Design a cooling schedule for this simulated annealing method.

b. Determine the other operational parameters necessary to complete an implementation of simulated annealing for the traveling salesman problem.

</ul>

10.12 Write a computer program that exhaustively enumerates all feasible traveling salesman tours.

<ul/>

a. Apply this algorithm to the ten-city problem data given in Exercise 10.9. Compare the quality of solutions and the computation time performance characteristics of your exchange heuristic, your implementation of simulated annealing, and the complete enumeration algorithm.

b. Estimate the amount of time your exhaustive enumeration method would require to find the optimal tour among 100 cities.

</ul>

10.13 Collect or create data for a large routing problem that involves approximately 100 locations. For example, consider routing delivery trucks, ordering the pickups and deliveries in a campus mail or courier service, or sequencing the safety inspection sites in a large complex of buildings. Construct the $100 \times 100$ matrix of distances. This problem is significantly larger than the 10-city problem addressed in previous exercises. Experiment with your local improvement and simulated annealing programs to determine how effectively and efficiently they solve this larger problem.
