# 3.7 PROJECT MANAGEMENT


The planning and coordination of large complex projects, consisting of many tasks or activities, is often viewed as less of an optimization problem and more of a management procedure aimed at completing a project under certain resource constraints and with attention to various cost-time trade-offs. However, certain aspects of project management can be dealt with conveniently by using network optimization methods that were discussed earlier in this chapter.

During the 1950s, two methodologies were developed-independently and simultaneously-for project management, and both approaches were based on network models. One method, called the Critical Path Method (CPM), was developed for the management of construction and production activities; while the other, called the Program Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT), was developed for the U.S. Navy in scheduling research and development activities for the Polaris missile program. CPM is based on deterministic specifications of task durations, and is therefore appropriate for production projects in which previous experience with the subtasks allows management to make reliable time estimates. PERT, on the other hand, is based on probabilistic estimates of task durations, and thus is most useful in a research and development environment where task completion times cannot be known in advance. Because both PERT and CPM approach project scheduling using similar network models and methods, the terms PERT and CPM are sometimes used interchangeably or collectively as PERT-CPM methods.
Large scale projects generally consist of a set of tasks or activities whose completion times are known or can be estimated (using a range of values, for example), and for which precedence constraints are specified, indicating that certain activities must be completed before others can begin. Simply identifying the distinct activities, and determining their durations and interdependencies, is an important part of the planning of any large project. PERT-CPM methods then provide for the construction of a network diagram, from which we can determine the minimum overall project duration and identify those tasks whose timely completion is critical or essential to the minimum project completion time. The purpose of this phase is to construct a schedule or time chart with start and finish times for each activity. Information may also be available that will allow us to evaluate the effect of putting extra money, people, or machines into a particular task in order to shorten the project duration. Thus, we can use the network to evaluate cost-time trade-offs. Finally, once the project is underway, the network diagram can be used in monitoring or controlling the project, to follow the progress of the various activities, and to make adjustments where appropriate. These three phases-planning, scheduling, and controlling-are essential to the effective management of any large project. In the following sections, we will see how the network methods underlying PERT and CPM help to support these phases of management.
