# 10.10.2 Ecosystem Management Using Genetic Algorithm Heuristics (Hughell and Roise 1995)


Managing a forest with the aim of profitable timber production and wildlife preservation is a good example of a multi-objective problem, in an environment of uncertainty, for which no single conventional optimization technique is adequate. A decision support system developed for ecosystem management in a North Carolina pine forest couples a wildlife behavior simulation model with an integer programming model that is solved using a genetic algorithm.

Foresters in the Croatan National Forest needed to address the question of how best to manage a 3,000-hectare region to sustain a dependable flow of timber while not destroying
the foraging territories and nesting sites of the endangered red-cockaded woodpecker species. Conventional management schemes are typically based on optimal activity schedules; but in this case, the planning horizon covered 20 -year harvesting cycles over a period of up to 200 years, during which there would be considerable environmental uncertainty as well as normal periodic re-evaluation. A strictly optimal harvesting schedule could easily become infeasible over time. What was needed was a decision support system that permits flexibility and presents a selection of good harvest schedules that could still be implemented in the face of environmental changes.
Stochastic wildlife group behavior simulation models have become valuable tools in the study of wildlife species viability. The red-cockaded woodpecker (RCW) model involves groups of individual birds having given attributes and foraging and breeding characteristics in five year cycles. The complex behavioral activities of RCW groups are abstracted down to fit into a lattice of 4 -hectare forest landscape stands. Nesting and foraging suitabilities are calculated at the beginning of the cycle, and then simulations are carried out to determine the probabilities of various eventualities, including:

- Migration or mortality of RCW groups with inadequate or unsuitable foraging and nesting resources.
- Sharing of landscape by multiple groups of RCW.
- RCW group splits.
- Successful breeding and nesting.
- RCW extinction.

Simulation results are stored for subsequent incorporation into the larger decision process.
The timber stand model covers successive 20 -year cycles of harvesting and regeneration. Details of the model include appropriate intermediate cuts, understory management through controlled burns, and primary stand harvests (which leave around 15 trees per hectare, 6 trees per acre). The overall management decision is the selection of a harvest schedule that maximizes the minimum timber volume harvested in any one management period and that supports the RCW proximity constraints. It is known that the optimal stand age for timber production is around 60 years, while the optimal stand age for woodpecker foraging is over 100 years. To represent this apparent mismatch, buffers are defined around each RCW nesting group, and parameters are introduced into the model to specify the minimum harvest age inside the buffer and outside the buffer. Through these constraints, the harvest schedule can respond to changes in the location of RCW groups; and herein lies the multi-objectivity of the optimization problem and the need for a feedback management policy.
The most obvious way to solve a two objective problem is to perform a series of singleobjective optimizations with one objective fixed and the other optimized. Because neither timber nor endangered wildlife are to be treated as fixed constraints in this ecosystem, this traditional approach is not appropriate. Instead, varying the parameters in the RCW proximity constraints permits the development of management policies that balance the benefits for both timber production and woodpecker viability.
The resulting optimization model takes the form of an integer linear programming problem. The problem was solved with a conventional branch-and-bound algorithm but it was recognized that in the natural world of uncertainty and changing assumptions, the concept of optimality may itself be problematic. The harvesting schedule deemed to be optimal at one time may turn out to be infeasible in the long run.

To achieve the flexibility needed to make the decision support system workable, the forest managers turned to the use of a genetic algorithm. The genetic algorithm heuristic starts with a random set of feasible harvest schedules (a population of solutions) that, based on their quality, are copied into the next generation. Genetic operations of crossover and mutation take place, and then the process repeats. (Here, the quality of a solution is the minimum one-period wood volume harvested, which is to be maximized.)

In this evolutionary algorithm, each feasible harvest schedule (i.e., each configuration of decision variable values) is a chromosome, which is comprised of genes (decision variables associated with individual stands), each of which is assigned an allele (a set of decision variable values prescribing a harvest schedule for the stand). After initially random schedules are created, chromosomes are copied into the next generation in such a way that those of superior quality contribute multiple copies at the expense of under-representation by those chromosomes with inferior quality. Randomly chosen chromosomes are paired for crossover; and for each pair, a certain percentage of the genes are selected and their alleles switched. Mutations occur as a certain percentage of chromosomes are chosen and in each a randomly selected gene (stand) is assigned an arbitrary feasible set of decision variable values (stand harvest schedule).

By allowing this genetic process to repeat over many generations, a population of good harvest schedules is generated in a small fraction of the time that it takes a branch-andbound algorithm to generate a single optimal solution. Croatan National Forest managers are convinced that a set of good choices, for a system fraught with uncertainty, is much more valuable than one optimal solution whose feasibility may become suspect in a changing ecological environment. In this context, the set of stands chosen for harvesting in the current management period is that set of stands represented in the largest number of good harvest schedules in the evolved solution population.

The decision support system that incorporates the wildlife behavior model, the stand characteristics, and the RCW proximity constraints together with the genetic heuristic search process, identifies the best solutions and displays the critical solutions for which an improvement in one objective (timber or woodpeckers) is gained only at the expense of the other. As had been expected, those schedules specifying longer rotations support larger populations of woodpeckers, while shorter rotations increase timber production. Feedback at 20-year cycles allows for the selection of a harvest plan, followed by adjustments to the RCW simulation model, followed by another timber harvesting decision, repeated throughout the 200-year horizon.

The set of options produced by this system allows forest managers to dynamically achieve a sustainable flow of timber production throughout the long planning horizon, which can be modified in response to the requirements for successful co-existence with wildlife. The system was developed in C++ with object oriented programming techniques, and run on a PC prior to being ported to a workstation platform. The ORSYS Operations Research System was used to obtain the branch-and-bound solutions.
