# 10.10.3 Efficient Routing and Delivery of Meals on Wheels (Manikas et al. 2016)


Meals on Wheels America is an organization dedicated to combatting hunger and poverty by delivering around a million prepared meals every day to individuals in need. Apart from food preparation activities, the major challenge each day is to efficiently route delivery vehicles to approximately 30 destinations per vehicle, deliver the appropriate meals to each recipient, and return to the point of origin to return coolers and heaters for use on the following day. Finding near optimal delivery routes is a complex problem
that is often addressed by using mathematical optimization tools such as CPLEX. But in a low-budget humanitarian organization staffed in large part by volunteers, it is unrealistic to incur the high cost of such tools, and to engage skilled and experienced analysts to develop routing solutions.
Other humanitarian operations had previously created tools and efficient solutions such as for scheduling and routing in home healthcare delivery programs. Transportation is an expensive and critical aspect of humanitarian logistics and operations in general, and indeed Meals on Wheels discovered its own similarities to other relief operations. These organizations typically rely on volunteers who have various levels of abilities and qualifications, must operate with limited time and financial resources, are expected to provide time-critical delivery of goods and services, and in practice often have only limited access to technological support.
Meals on Wheels deliveries generally originate at an institutional kitchen. Specific locations for delivery are pre-determined and are roughly clustered according to neighborhood proximity with at most 30 delivery points in a cluster for a given driver (the limitation being due to space in the volunteer's car and the need to get the fresh meals delivered in a timely manner). Manually routing vehicles and preparing delivery instructions for individual drivers is an extremely time-consuming process that must be completed for each day's unique pattern of deliveries. The vehicle routing problem encountered in delivering meals has been recognized by operations researchers as a computationally difficult problem for which no simple solution is known; dealing with such a challenge manually is far too time-consuming.
A local branch of Meals on Wheels in Boise, Idaho, wisely undertook to develop a much more practical approach. An affordable solution was found through the use of a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet and an Application Programming Interface (API) that connected older personal computers at no cost to an existing Internet connection providing access to mapping services from MapQuest and Google. Researchers familiar with the old manual system of delivering meals analyzed this system and made some recommendations for improving efficiency of meal delivery. Excel spreadsheets were already available; Excel's Visual Basic for Applications was used to write programs to access mapping data and build a travel matrix to store information about travel times and distances in the meal delivery area.

However, for the routing process itself, Excel's Solver would have required customized optimization models for each route. Instead the system was built so that a VBA procedure could use publically accessible time and distance information from MapQuest and Google. Researchers and analysts then developed customized code for a solver to provide all the vehicle routing processes needed for meal delivery.
In the system developed, users are able to input the addresses for each day's deliveries. Then in preparation for vehicle routing, the system constructs an accurate and up-to-date travel matrix that contains the travel time (or distance) between each possible pair of locations in the system. With the information from this matrix, the system then creates driving information for all routes, that is, for all possible pairings of delivery stops. Finally, the system applies a genetic algorithm to select for each vehicle the optimal or near optimal route for that vehicle's deliveries for the day.
The researchers created this genetic algorithm, customized to meet the requirements of the meal delivery application. The algorithm was initialized with a population of chromosomes, encodings of possible routes consisting of a series of stops in the order to be visited. Then through crossovers and mutations, alternative routes are chosen and evaluated with the aim of identifying the route with the least driving time. A crossover is accomplished by considering the next stop in the route represented by one parent and the corresponding
next stop in another parent, and then randomly (50\% chance) choosing the next stop from either parent. In this way a new offspring chromosome (route) is constructed with representative components from each parent. Mutation occurs by selecting a chromosome and exchanging two stops in the route sequence, thereby creating a slightly different chromosome representing a slightly different route driving time.

The best performance within the Meals on Wheels routing application was achieved by conducting multiple runs of the GA process, each run starting with unique random initial population of routes. Multiple runs of course require more computation time, but users agreed that the increased wait time was reasonable in order to obtain a faster route for delivery of meals.

At this Meals on Wheels site, a centralized planning location coordinates kitchen operations, special dietary needs of recipients and delivery logistics. Route coordinators found this system simple and convenient to use, and route drivers found the driving instructions to be accurate and easy to follow. With the application of this vehicle routing system, route driving time reductions range from $2 \%$ to $27 \%$ for each route. Therefore vehicle operating costs were substantially reduced, and volunteer driving commitments were met more easily.

This application is organized into a comprehensive package for ease and convenience of use. The delivery scheduling and routing system reviews the list of customers requesting meals each day, and accordingly updates the list of stops to be made and the specific meals to be delivered at each stop. It makes updates to mapping data related to delivery stop locations, optimizes the route using the GA algorithm, and finally automatically prints driving directions to be given to each driver.

For a long route with 30 stops, the route sequencing and instruction generation takes about 15 minutes which is a welcome improvement over the manual system in which route coordinators spent over an hour every day planning a single route. The system continues in use, and plans are underway for several enhancements, as well as sharing the system with Meals on Wheels organizations in other localities.
