# 7.4 SOFTWARE FOR QUEUEING MODELS


Application tools for queueing and simulation studies are abundant. While there are a number of software products specifically designed for analytical modeling of queueingsystems, many queueing systems are studied through simulation, and in that case analysts can choose from a variety of software packages and languages for general simulation, as will be described in Chapter 8.
Matlab from MathWorks includes queueing blocks such as queues, servers, and switches as part of its discrete-event simulation engine SimEvents.
GNU Octave, a Scientific Programming Language that is similar to, and largely compatible with, Matlab also has a queueing package that provides functions for queueing networks and Markov chains analysis. It can be used to compute steady state performance measures for open, closed and mixed networks with single or multiple job classes. Furthermore, several transient and steady state performance measures for Markov chains can be computed, such as state occupancy probabilities, and mean time to absorption. Both discrete and continuous time Markov chains are supported.
$\mathbf{R}$ has a freely available queueing package called Queuecomputer that implements computationally efficient methods for simulating queues with arbitrary arrival and service times (Ebert 2017).

We have noticed in recent years that there are a number of web based systems that accept input from users to certain queueing models via a web browser, solve the problem and display the solution back on the browser without the need for the user to install any software. A quick web search can easily find systems such as Solutions to Queueing Systems, and Queueing Theory Calculator. Hlynka (2017) maintains a comprehensive list of queueing theory software.
