# 9.2 AN INTRODUCTION TO GAME THEORY


Game theory addresses possible approaches to decision-making under the assumption of complete ignorance. It is described in terms of players, payoffs, and strategies. Consider a two-person game: the decision-maker (player one) selects an alternative and then nature (player two) selects a state. The payoff is given by the corresponding entry in a payoff matrix. Player two is assumed to be indifferent to the choices of player one (except when the decision-maker is slightly paranoid). Player one will make a selection based on some strategy intended to make the most of the opportunity. Throughout this discussion, we refer to the following payoff matrix:

|  | Alternatives |  |  |  |  |  |
| :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: |
| States | $\mathrm{a}_{1}$ | $\mathrm{a}_{2}$ | $\mathrm{a}_{3}$ | $\mathrm{a}_{4}$ | $\mathrm{a}_{5}$ | $\mathrm{a}_{6}$ |
| $\Theta_{1}$ | 5 | 3 | 0 | 3 | 2 | 3 |
| $\Theta_{2}$ | 5 | 3 | 8 | 6 | 7 | 3 |
| $\Theta_{3}$ | 0 | 3 | 0 | 1 | 2 | 2 |
| $\Theta_{4}$ | 4 | 3 | 0 | 2 | 2 | 1 |

Most decision-makers employ a process of elimination to reduce the number of alternatives. The simplest form of elimination is called dominance. An alternative $\mathrm{a}_{\mathrm{k}}$ is said to dominate an alternative $\mathrm{a}_{\mathrm{j}}$ if, for every possible state, $\Theta_{\mathrm{i}}$, alternative $\mathrm{a}_{\mathrm{k}}$ is at least as good as alternative $\mathrm{a}_{\mathrm{j}}$. Alternative $\mathrm{a}_{\mathrm{j}}$ can be eliminated from consideration.
In the example matrix, consider alternatives $\mathrm{a}_{2}$ and $\mathrm{a}_{6}$. Observe that, no matter which state eventually occurs, alternative $\mathrm{a}_{2}$ is always at least as good as $\mathrm{a}_{6}$. Therefore, alternative $\mathrm{a}_{6}$ is dominated and can be eliminated from further consideration. By inspection, we can verify that no other alternatives are dominated.
A variety of strategies can be employed in making the selection of alternatives. We describe a few of the more common ones and, as they are introduced, we identify each one with a corresponding personality trait. The selection depends on the decision-maker's attitude toward risk. Because each choice has a different degree of risk associated with it, different people will make different selections. It is important to realize that there is no absolutely correct answer to this problem.
