# 10.9 SOFTWARE FOR METAHEURISTICS


Software implementation of greedy, local, and metaheuristic algorithms is commonly developed in general-purpose programming languages such as C, C++, Java, Python, and so on. Appropriate data structures can easily be chosen that represent not only a current problem configuration, but also proposed modifications to the current configuration. Standard library functions for generating random numbers are convenient for effecting the probabilistic acceptance of such modifications, as required in simulated annealing and genetic algorithms. Because of the ease of developing such programs, and because the details of the implementation are often very application specific, commercial software is not typically needed for these heuristic techniques. Furthermore, even when (meta)heuristic algorithms are implemented in software systems for specific applications or industry, the design details tend to be hidden from the user for proprietary and competitive reasons.
Among the limited offerings of metaheuristic software tools is Evolver, spreadsheetbased product from Palisade Corporation which works as an Add-in to Microsoft Excel in which models are implemented in a spreadsheet, and solved as constrained optimization problems using genetic algorithms. Microsoft Excel itself comes with an Evolutionary Solver (a simpler form of genetic algorithms) to solve models that are implemented as spreadsheets.
MATLAB from MathWorks offers a Global Optimization Toolbox that includes genetic algorithms, simulated annealing, and particle swarm solvers. While using programming languages to implement metaheuristics might be computationally more efficient,

MATLAB's toolbox can reduce the implementation effort significantly with the tool boxes and functions it offers. It also gives the user some control over algorithm design. For example, the user can select the type of crossover and mutation to use with the genetic algorithms, and in simulated annealing, the user can decide on the temperature schedule and acceptance criteria among other things. Furthermore, developers can use MATLAB as a platform to develop software environments and tools including optimization environments. For example, TOMLAB, a general purpose development and modeling environment, implements a real-coded genetic algorithm called TOMLAB/GENO that can be used with various optimization problems.
Metaheuristic algorithms are typically used for problems that are computationally complex and messy to model and solve using structured modeling approaches such as mathematical programming. Hence, they often need to be tailored to the problem at hand. Therefore, it is no surprise that there are not many canned metaheuristic software systems as they need to be customized to specific problems. Nevertheless, the internet is full of codes and binaries in different computer languages that can be utilized in software development, the vast majority of which are freely available for download. COIN-OR (Computational Infrastructure for Operations Research), for example, includes some open source libraries and frameworks for metaheuristic development. Similarly, Google offers a suite of portable software called Google Optimization Tools for solving combinatorial problems. It is almost impossible to list all software sources that pertain to various metaheuristics and the readers are encouraged to refer to the book's website and conduct their own online search. The website GitHub.com contains open source code for several algorithms of interest.
