# 9.7.2 Refinery Pricing under Uncertainty (Keefer 1995)


During the 1980s, when crude oil prices were fluctuating dramatically and refining overcapacity made the profitability of operating refineries unpredictable, an oil company shut down a large overseas refinery. Management's opinion of how best to dispose of this non-performing investment varied considerably: some thought it would not even be
possible to give away a shut down refinery, while others hoped to sell the defunct facility for a substantial sum.
For purposes of price negotiations, management needed to develop some idea of what the refinery would be worth to a variety of types of potential buyers. Because the current owner had been unable to operate this refinery profitably (nor did it foresee being able to do so in the near future), presumably a likely buyer would not be a company just like the current owner. Instead of the buyer being a major international oil company, it was expected that the buyer would be a small, well-capitalized company, perhaps a newcomer to the industry, in the business of trading, refining, or marketing oil, and which would take a short term, entrepreneurial approach to using this refinery.
In the process of determining how to price the refinery for sale, the decision analyst drafted four operating scenarios describing how each of four categories of potential buyers could use the refinery profitably:

1. In the first scenario, the new owner would not actually operate as a refinery, but would instead use the facilities as a terminal, berthing ships, storing and transshipping crude oil, storing and blending certain products, and selling to local customers.
2. The second scenario consists of all the aforementioned activities plus operating the refinery itself opportunistically during periods of advantageous refining margins. (This posed some problems because positive refining margins in the near term were possible but very unpredictable.)
3. In a third scenario, the operation of the facilities as in the first scenario would be supplemented by refining under a so-called netback agreement with a crude oil producer. Under such an arrangement, the refinery agrees to buy and refine crude oil, at an agreed-upon steady supply rate for a prespecified refining margin. The predictability of throughput arising from this scenario is of considerable value, but this advantage is offset by the uncertainty of what netback margin could be negotiated with a crude oil producing country.
4. The fourth scenario is a combination of the first three: use of facilities for storing, transshipping, blending, a netback agreement to support a steady refining operation, and stepped-up refining activity during periods of positive refining margins.

The current owner of the refinery had traditionally analyzed and evaluated uncertainties using deterministic methods to calculate net present value, then applying sensitivity analysis. This simple approach turned out to be inadequate for pricing the refinery. Net present value (NPV) calculations were based on large and uncertain ranges for parameters such as margins and throughputs. These estimates led to discrepancies in NPVs that fluctuated too widely (over hundreds of millions of dollars) to give management much insight into how to price the refinery for purposes of negotiating a sale.
Rather than a deterministic model that allowed small changes in parameters, the analyst chose to utilize decision analysis techniques, treating the heretofore unwieldy parameters as random variables and basing much of the uncertain data on judgmental probability assessments.
The expected NPV was calculated using a decision structure known as a probability tree. This differs from a conventional decision tree in that the branches in the tree do not represent a timeline of sequentially made decisions in response to specific uncertainties. There are no decision nodes per se; rather, the branches associated with uncertainties denote the
possible outcomes of the uncertainties. Working from the extremities of the tree back to the root of the tree, the probability-weighted average NPV was simple to calculate, and the entire model and computational process were easily understood by management.
Calculations for the fourth scenario showed the highest expected value of $\$ 53$ million, while lower expectations were associated with all the other scenarios (as low as $\$ 23$ million for the first scenario). The analyst's recommendation to management that it would be reasonable for certain prospective buyers to pay in the range of $\$ 23$ million to $\$ 53$ million for the shut down refinery constituted a hopeful alternative to the sad prospect of having trouble giving it away. As a result, a decision was made to wait for a reasonable offer, and indeed, a sale was eventually made for a price in excess of $\$ 50$ million.
