# 9.7.4 Investment Decisions and Risk in Petroleum Exploration (Walls et al. 1995)


The exploration division of Phillips Petroleum Company must routinely evaluate a broad range of exploration investments, determine an appropriate level of participation in each
project available to the firm, and select the most advantageous mix of investments consistent with the division's budget. Petroleum exploration is an industry characterized by financial risk and uncertainty. There are often investment opportunities with high probabilities of small losses, and others with small probabilities of ruinous losses, not reflected in expected values. The expected value concept that had guided Phillips investment decisions in the past did not adequately address how sensitive managers are to exposure to the chance of substantial capital losses. There is a general perception in the petroleum industry that this exposure can be dealt with by entering into smaller capital allocations in more different projects, thereby spreading the risk. Yet Phillips Exploration had no formal way to quantify the value of such diversification. Their methods for controlling risk were often informal, and based strongly on the intuition of individual managers.
Attitudes toward risk interfered with traditional decision-making processes because managers at Phillips needed to look beyond expected values and consider downside risks as an integral up-front part of the investment picture. Management had evidently never realized how strongly risk averse they were (and in fact needed to be), and how poorly their decision-making framework had supported this position on risk.
A software package was developed to assist management in the process of deciding how to allocate investment capital across a set of possible exploration projects. Using some of the standard tools of decision analysis, this software not only provided a means of organizing the data associated with each investment opportunity, but it also offered a way of incorporating the company's attitudes toward risk and allowing decisions to reflect these attitudes.
The new decision software package met several of the company's needs. One requirement was to have a relatively consistent measure of risk to be used over the entire range of investment alternatives. Management needed to be able to compare the risk and upside potential of two projects; for example, one with an unlikely but large payoff versus one with a highly probable lower payoff, both of which may have equal expected values. The methodology incorporated into the software package facilitated this comparison between alternatives.
The package also allowed Phillips Exploration division to determine the optimal level of participation in each of many diverse projects having a desirable mix of risk characteristics. There are typically more investment opportunities than can be afforded with the scarce investment capital available; so rather than merely choosing projects to invest in, the company must also allocate and balance its investment capital.
In the exploration business, a prospect is a geological structure thought (or known) to contain petroleum potential, and a play is a collection of geologically similar prospects located in the same geographic locale. The decision software package assumes probabilistic independence among individual projects. But because prospects within the same play have, by definition, similar physical characteristics, they may not be independent at all. To deal with this interdependence, the package allows users to specify whether they wish to evaluate investment projects on a prospect basis or on a play basis.
Each new investment opportunity presents new alternatives to consider. And over time, there emerge decision patterns of which no one is really consciously aware. The decision support package measures the firm's risk tolerance by reviewing past decisions and encoding this information as a utility function. In so doing, the package thus captures the user's subjective (and perhaps unrecognized) perceptions about probabilities and risks associated with specific exploration outcomes. By creating a historical risk personality for the decision-maker, the system provides an integrated capability for ensuring a consistent risk attitude in evaluating and ranking projects for capital investment and determining participation levels in different prospects or plays that are consistent with attitudes toward risk.

This software package does not require the user to have any specialized technical knowledge of decision analysis, risk profiles, or utility theory. Instead, the user selects from several input formats and enters available data; then the software interprets the input and constructs a decision tree.

User reaction to this decision support system has been mixed. Management has displayed some initial reluctance to accept the utility functions generated by the software. And although the users acknowledge that they are not risk-neutral, there remains some hesitation on their part to quantify their risk aversion. Nevertheless, the use of this tool has raised awareness of the issues of risk tolerance and the importance of its role in capital investment allocation. Phillips has used this package to support companywide analysis of all exploration projects. This same software is also used by several other petroleum exploration firms, both to assist with small-scale individual decision-making and for comprehensive organizational decisions.
