# 9.7.3 Decisions for Radioactive Waste Management (Perdue and Kumar 1999)


High-level radioactive waste resulting from spent nuclear fuel is sometimes dealt with by encapsulating the waste in glass, using a process known as vitrification. But just how much nuclear waste cleanup is necessary, desirable, and cost-effective. Determining the appropriate extent of this technologically difficult undertaking has proven to be quite a complex decision process. In a joint effort of the U.S. Department of Energy, the New York State Energy Research and Development Authority, and Westinghouse Electric Company, decision analysis techniques have been used to help analyze how this cleanup process should be properly accomplished.
The contaminated waste is contained in underground tanks. Waste is removed from the tanks, sealed in glass containers, and the tanks cleaned and rinsed. This process is repeated until the tanks are no longer classified as high-level radioactive waste, but the declassification criterion is not perfectly defined and includes safety issues, and technical capabilities, as well as social and economic considerations. Decision analysis tools were used to study alternative clean up processes based on expected monetary benefits and societal costs.
The different cleanup regimens studied range from one extreme in which only currently used technologies are employed, to the other extreme which assumes availability of all technologies under development. For each scenario, numerous levels of waste removal are considered, ranging up to $99.9 \%$ cleanup of the known initial radioactivity measured.
For each combination of technology and radiation removal level, the analysts develop projections of benefits and costs. Societal benefits are quantified by estimating the monetary value of an avoided radiation dose plus the value of not having to undertake construction of additional containers. Costs include operating expenses for the vitrification process, tank cleanup, and technology deployment. The decision model includes a time factor that addresses the time it takes to clean a tank, which would be important in case key equipment failures caused interruptions or delays at critical times during the cleaning process.
Sensitivity analysis was applied to determine the robustness of the projections and to reveal just which of several uncertainties are the ones that most critically affect the estimated outcomes. Results of this study are being examined by the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission as it works toward establishing standards and requirements for nuclear waste management.
