# 9.5.1 Misconceptions of Probability


Suppose that you are in Reno and that you have been casually watching people play roulette. You notice that red has come up 40 times in a row. Would you now bet everything you own on black? We know that getting red 41 times in a row is highly unlikely (a probability of approximately $4.5 \times 10^{-14}$ ), and therefore, for many people, black seems highly probable. But in fact, assuming that the wheel is fair, the probability of red on the forty-first spin, given that we already have 40 reds, is 0.50 .

This assumption is known as the Gambler's Fallacy. The same behavior can be observed in more practical decision-making situations. When people observe a sequence of events with a high proportion of failures, they assume that the probability of success must be increasing, and they adjust their decisions and their attitude toward risk accordingly. As in the game of roulette, this is not rational when the individual observations are independent.

There is a popular lottery in which people pick six numbers between 1 and 49 . Every week, six numbers are drawn at random, and anyone who matches all six wins the grand prize (usually in the millions of dollars). There is considerable speculation about "Which numbers are more likely?" Many people apparently believe that some combinations must surely be more likely than others. "You will never see the sequence $1,2,3,4,5,6^{\prime \prime}$ for example. If we try to explain that $1,2,3,4,5,6$ is just as likely as any other, many people respond by telling us that we do not understand the basic laws of probability and true randomness. One can even purchase software to help us select six numbers that are truly random (and hopefully lucky).

Consider the following experiment: suppose that we ask people to select colored marbles from a large opaque jar, one at a time with replacement. The subjects are told that the jar contains two colors, red and white, and that two-thirds of the marbles are one color, while one third are the other color. The first individual draws six marbles and finds four red and
two white. He concludes that the jar is two-thirds red. The second individual (drawing from a different jar) selects 20 marbles, of which 11 are red and 9 are white. She concludes that her jar is also two-thirds red. After making their draws, we ask the subjects how much confidence they have in their assessment.

Most people agree that the first person has a higher probability of guessing correctly. His draw corresponds precisely to the expected distribution if two-thirds of the marbles are red. The second subject found the colors to be almost equally divided and feels that the probability of guessing correctly is only slightly better than $50 \%$. In fact, in both cases, the probability of two-thirds red is exactly 0.80 . The larger number of draws in the second experiment greatly increases the accuracy of the conclusions. Generally, people do not appreciate the significance of sample size information. The same principle is true for market surveys and opinion polls. Assuming that the selection procedure is unbiased, even small samples can be very accurate predictors.

As already discussed with reference to the Allais Paradox in the previous section, people are inconsistent in their application of small probabilities. Probabilities with an obvious physical interpretation, such as a 50\% chance of getting a head when tossing a coin, are easy to understand. However, probabilities of 0.48 and 0.52 are both considered close to 0.50 , and we perform this substitution in our minds when we analyze a problem. The $4 \%$ difference is often essentially ignored.

At the same time, a probability of 0.01 is too small to visualize. Consequently, people have a tendency to either exaggerate the probability, or to decide that it is essentially zero. Down to a certain level, people will treat probabilities of 0.01 or 0.02 as if they were closer to 0.05 or 0.10 . At some point, the associated probability is taken as being effectively zero. The same behavior is true for probabilities close to 1.0 . The perceived probability is less than the actual probability up to some point at which people assume that the event is certain. This behavior, although understandable, is mathematically irrational.

Another common error in the appreciation of probability concerns the net effect of a series of conjunctive (or disjunctive) events. Consider a decision-maker who is responsible for a large project composed of a series of small components. The project could be the design and installation of a computer system, an office tower, or a nuclear reactor. We assume that each part must be successful in order for the project to succeed. This is a conjunctive event in that the probability of success of the project is the product of the probabilities of success of the components.

Let us suppose that the decision-maker and his staff investigate each component, and they determine that each has a 99\% chance of success. They conclude that the success of the project is highly likely. In actual fact, if there are 1,000 components, the probability of a successful project is less than 0.00005 . This problem is compounded by the fact that the people responsible for the individual components are not likely to estimate a $99 \%$ chance of success. At that level of certainty, they will usually say that they are sure that their part will work properly.

As a final example, consider the following problem based on the format of a popular television game show. Contestants are shown three doors and told that behind one door is a two week, all expense paid vacation to Hawaii, or something equally valuable. The other two doors conceal a consolation prize. Suppose the contestant selects door number 2, and then the host opens door 3 and shows the contestant that it contains one of the consolation prizes. (Doors 1 and 2 are not opened.) The host then asks the contestant if he/she wants to change his/her initial choice (from door 2 to door 1 in this case). Based on the probabilities, and on this new information, should he/she change doors? We will leave this question for the reader to ponder, and come back to it later in this chapter.
