# 6.9.4 Markov Decision Processes in Dairy Farming (Rukav et al. 2014, Suvak et al. 2016)


Dairy and cattle farmers throughout the world face similar problems: namely aiming to produce more and richer milk, handling increases in the price of corn or other feed, varying the diet and conception rate in milk cows, and managing herd growth. Collaborations between researchers in a university mathematics department in Croatia and an enterprising IT solutions provider for agricultural businesses have resulted in a new business environment that can help farmers address the questions earlier. Through the use of Operations Research techniques and analytical software tools, analysts were inspired to apply Markov chains to minimize the expected long term cost of milk production at dairy cow farms.
In this Markov model, each dairy cow is considered to be in a state that indicates the quality of her milk (milk fat, lactose, and proteins) and the quantity (with respect to a targeted level considered to be optimal, based on previous studies of lactation). Farmers and veterinarians consider the discrete-time homogeneous Markov chain to be an accurate and appropriate probabilistic model for correctly classifying a dairy cow's transitions from one state to another.
The one step transition probability matrix was constructed by estimating observed and simulated data for particular representative cows over a period of time. The initial distribution puts every cow initially in her best state, producing the most favorable quantities and qualities of milk. This and the transition probability matrix describe the transitions of a dairy cow from one lactation state to another over time. However, in the dairy business, the dairy farmer is on site and is therefore in a position to intervene, making a decision to take some action when the cow is seen to be in certain states.
By incorporating into the Markov chains the finite set of possible decisions or actions that may be taken in each state, the basic Markov chain is expanded into a broader stochastic model known as a Markov decision process. For example, for a cow in a given state, the farmer may choose to take no action (milk produced is of acceptable quality and quantity), take action to increase lactation (if quantity is too low), take action to improve quality, or replace the dairy cow with a new one who is initialized as being in the best state. With any action, there is an associated cost, and our dairy farmer's aim is to minimize cost over the long term.
In the Markov decision process, not every decision is allowable in every state nor with every possible state transition. Because the action decisions are limited, the cow being in only certain states can transition into only particular other states, and the effects of the action decision apply to only particular states. Also the effects of the action decision alter future transitions in only limited ways; steps to improve lactation result in slow results, so that a transition occurs into only a slightly better lactation state in a single transition, rather than entering a greatly improved state in only one transition.
With the addition of decision actions that affect transition probabilities, it might seem that the Markov properties have not been preserved. However because the impact of the
actions is controlled, analysts are able to build the stochastic model so that each possible decision policy results in a new homogeneous Markov chain which can be analyzed in the conventional way.
