# 10.6 TABU SEARCH


Tabu search (TS) is a metaheuristic that utilizes a memory capability in escaping local optimal search regions by forbidding previously made moves from being revisited for a certain number of iterations. Tabu search was introduced by Glover (1989) and since then many extensions and variants of the method have been published in various areas of applications. The core concept of tabu search is similar to local search where it starts with a single solution and, using some neighborhood generation scheme, identifies a candidate list of moves (neighbors) whose contributions to the objective function are evaluated. The move with the greater contributions is selected and the reverse of the move (put it back) is placed on the tabu list to prohibit returning to the previous solution for a certain number of iterations as imposed by the size of the tabu list. Once a move is off the list, it becomes permissible to be revisited in future iterations. An exception to the rule is when
a move passes the aspiration criterion which is commonly when a tabu move can identify a solution that is better than the best-found-so-far. The rationale in temporarily forbidding moves that had been tried is to allow other moves to be visited even if they are worse than the best local solution. This lets the search algorithm escape local optimal search regions to potential global search regions.

<ul/>

**Example 10.5**

Consider again the knapsack problem presented earlier in Table 10.2 and suppose that a new move or neighbor is created by switching a 0 to 1 or 1 to 0 representing the selection or unselection of an item respectively. The neighborhood size is therefore $|\mathrm{n}|$ and each move must comply with the maximum allowable budget of 450 for all items; otherwise it will be considered infeasible. Assuming a tabu list size of 3, Table 10.11 includes an initial solution (S1) followed by ten tabu search iterations. The initial solution can in general be selected randomly or via some other method or heuristic. In this example, S1 was created based on the simple heuristic of item with the largest value is selected first. Z is the objective function value and $\Delta \mathrm{Z}$ is the change in the objective function if a move or neighbor is selected. X means that a move produces an infeasible solution due to exceeding the maximum allowable budget, and the tabu list (TL) represents the number of future iterations for which a move is prohibited (unless it passes the aspiration criterion).

Starting with S1, the only possible moves are to unselect items 2, 3, or 6, which will reduce the objective function value by 200,300 , or 450 respectively.

Although all three moves will worsen the current value of Z , the algorithm must pick one as it may be the path to a better solution in future iterations; otherwise, the algorithm will be stuck in its current solution. The least damaging move is to unselect item 2 which will deteriorate Z by 200 as identified by the box around it. This move leads to S 2 with $\mathrm{Z}=750$ and puts item 2 on the tabu list for the coming three iterations. In S2, the best move is to put item 2 back into the solution as it adds the maximum value of 200 to Z; however, this move is tabu and therefore the next best move is to select item 7 that adds 180 to the objective, resulting in a Z value of 930 as shown for S 3 . Note that item 7 is now tabu for the coming three iterations, while item 2 will remain prohibited for the coming two. The process continues in this fashion until a stopping criterion is met. For this small example, our stopping criterion was to run it for 10 iterations after the initial solution, which happened to produce the optimal solution in S11. An important point to note is that as long as a move is on the tabu list, it cannot be taken unless it passes the aspiration criterion, which did not occur in this example. After a certain number of moves defined by the tabu list length ( 3 in this case) a move is off the list and it can be selected again. In this example, item 2 could not be selected in S1, S2, and S3 as it was on the tabu list. But after that it was off the list and was indeed selected again in S7 at which time it became tabu once again for three more iterations. Of course, the best found solution will be updated as better solutions are obtained and will be reported at the end.

The tabu list is used to explore new search areas where larger list size would force the search algorithm to move to new neighborhoods that might not otherwise be explored. The tabu list is a form of short-memory that is used to explore the space based on search recency and its length or tenure can be either static (e.g., 3) or dynamic where it can be randomly selected between two values (e.g., between 3 and 7). Tabu search can be extended to include intensification. The algorithm can use intermediate term memory to keep track of the frequency that certain solution components have occurred. During intensification, the method will fix some of those components that have occurred frequently during past iterations, and then do a more intense search, for example, by expanding the size of the search neighborhood. This tends to accelerate the movement toward a local optimum. The method may also incorporate diversification. Tabu search

**TABLE 10.11** <br>
Tabu Search Iterations for the Knapsack Problem

| Solution |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Z |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| S1 | 0 | 1 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 950 |
| Neighbor | 1 | 0 | 0 | 1 | 1 | 0 | 1 | 1 |  |
| $\Delta \mathrm{Z}$ | X | -200 | -300 | X | X | -450 | X | X |  |
| TL |  | 3 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| S2 | 0 | 0 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 750 |
| Neighbor | 1 | 1 | 0 | 1 | 1 | 0 | 1 | 1 |  |
| $\Delta \mathrm{Z}$ | 120 | 200 | -300 | 84 | 150 | -450 | 180 | X |  |
| TL |  | 2 |  |  |  |  | 3 |  |  |
| S3 | 0 | 0 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 1 | 1 | 0 | 930 |
| Neighbor | 1 | 1 | 0 | 1 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 1 |  |
| $\Delta \mathrm{Z}$ | X | X | -300 | X | X | -450 | -180 | X |  |
| TL |  | 1 | 3 |  |  |  | 2 |  |  |
| S4 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 1 | 1 | 0 | 630 |
| Neighbor | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 1 |  |
| $\Delta \mathrm{Z}$ | 120 | 200 | 300 | 84 | 150 | -450 | -180 | 220 |  |
| TL |  |  | 2 |  |  |  | 1 | 3 |  |
| S5 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 850 |
| Neighbor | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 0 |  |
| $\Delta \mathrm{Z}$ | X | X | X | 84 | X | -450 | -180 | -220 |  |
| TL |  |  | 1 | 3 |  |  |  | 2 |  |
| S6 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 1 | 0 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 934 |
| Neighbor | 1 | 1 | 1 | 0 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 0 |  |
| $\Delta \mathrm{Z}$ | X | X | X | -84 | X | -450 | -180 | -220 |  |
| TL |  |  |  | 2 |  |  | 3 | 1 |  |
| S7 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 1 | 0 | 1 | 0 | 1 | 754 |
| Neighbor | 1 | 1 | 1 | 0 | 1 | 0 | 1 | 0 |  |
| $\Delta \mathrm{Z}$ | 120 | 200 | X | 84 | 150 | -450 | 180 | -220 |  |
| TL |  | 3 |  | 1 |  |  | 2 |  |  |
| S8 | 0 | 1 | 0 | 1 | 0 | 1 | 0 | 1 | 954 |
| Neighbor | 1 | 0 | 1 | 0 | 1 | 0 | 1 | 0 |  |
| $\Delta \mathrm{Z}$ | X | -200 | X | -84 | X | -450 | X | -220 |  |
| TL |  | 2 |  |  |  |  | 1 | 3 |  |
| S9 | 0 | 1 | 0 | 1 | 0 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 734 |
| Neighbor | 1 | 0 | 1 | 0 | 1 | 0 | 1 | 1 |  |
| $\Delta \mathrm{Z}$ | 120 | -200 | X | -84 | 150 | -450 | 180 | 220 |  |
| TL |  | 1 |  |  | 3 |  |  | 2 |  |
| S10 | 0 | 1 | 0 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 884 |
| Neighbor | 1 | 0 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 1 | 1 |  |
| $\Delta \mathrm{Z}$ | 120 | -200 | X | -84 | -150 | -450 | X | X |  |
| TL | 3 |  |  |  | 2 |  |  | 1 |  |
| S11 | 1 | 1 | 0 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 1004 |
| Neighbor | 0 | 0 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 1 | 1 |  |
| $\Delta \mathrm{Z}$ | -120 | -200 | X | -84 | -150 | -450 | X | X |  |
| TL | 2 | 3 |  |  | 1 |  |  |  |  |


is intended to enable the search to escape local solutions. Under diversification, we use long term memory to track solution components that have not been explored. We begin a new search by incorporating some of these components, thereby forcing the algorithm to cover the space more broadly. Further detail and nuance of tabu search is available in Glover and Laguna (1997), Aarts and Lenstra (1997), Du (2010), and Taillard (2016).

</ul>