# 8 Simulation



Simulation is the process of studying the behavior of an existing or proposed system by observing the behavior of a model representing the system. Simulation is the imitation of a real system or process operating over a period of time. By simulating a system, we may be able to make observations of the performance of an existing system, hypothesize modifications to an existing system, or even determine the operating characteristics of a nonexistent system. Through simulation, it is possible to experiment with the operation of a system in ways that would be too costly or dangerous or otherwise infeasible to perform on the actual system itself. This chapter introduces simulation models and describes how they can be used in analyzing and predicting the performance of systems under varying circumstances.

## 8.1 SIMULATION: PURPOSES AND APPLICATIONS



Simulation has traditionally been viewed as a method to be employed when all other analytical approaches fail. Computer simulations have been used profitably for several decades now, and simulation seems to have outlived its early reputation as a method of last resort. Some systems are simple enough to be represented by mathematical models and solved with well defined mathematical techniques such as the calculus, analytical formulas, or mathematical programming methods. The simple queueing systems discussed in Chapter 7 fall into this category. Analytical methods are clearly the most straightforward way to deal with such problems. However, many systems are so complex that mathematical methods are inadequate to model the intricate (and possibly stochastic) interaction among system elements. In these cases, simulation techniques may provide a framework for observing, predicting, modifying, and even optimizing a system.
The use of a computer makes simulation techniques feasible. Information obtained through observing system behavior via simulation can suggest ways to modify a system. And while simulation models remain very costly and time consuming to develop and to run on a computer, these drawbacks have been mitigated significantly in recent times by faster computers and special purpose simulation languages and software products. Indeed, simulation packages have become so widely available and easy to use, and simulation itself has such an intuitive appeal and seems so simple to understand, that a word of caution is in order.
Simulation languages and packages are as easy to misuse as to use correctly. Computer outputs produced by simulation packages can be very impressive. Particularly when other analytical approaches to a problem have been unsatisfactory, it is tempting to embrace whatever output is obtained through a sophisticated simulation process. Nevertheless, there is a great deal to be gained through successful simulation. Proper use of simulation methodology requires good judgment and insight and a clear understanding of the
limitations of the simulation model in use, so that valid conclusions can be drawn by the analyst. This chapter presents some guidelines that should be helpful in developing the ability to understand and build simulation models. The advantages that may be derived from the use of simulation include:

1. Through simulation it is possible to experiment with new designs, policies, and processes in industrial, economic, military, and biological settings, to name a few. In the controlled environment of a simulation, observations can be made and preparations can be made to deal appropriately with the outcomes predicted in the experiment.
2. Simulation permits the analyst to compress or expand time. For example, collisions in a particle accelerator may occur too rapidly for instruments to record, while erosion in a riverbed may take place too slowly to permit any effective intervention in the process. By simulating such processes, a time control mechanism can be used to slow down or speed up events and place them on a time scale that is useful to human analysts.
3. While a simulation may be expensive to develop, the model can be applied repeatedly for various kinds of experimentation.
4. Simulation can be used to analyze a proposed system or experiment on a real system without disturbing the actual system. Experimentation on real systems, particularly systems involving human subjects, often causes the behavior of the system to be modified in response to the experimentation. Thus, the system being observed is then not the original system under investigation; that is, we are measuring the wrong system.
5. It is often less costly to obtain data from a simulation than from a real system.
6. Simulations can be used to verify or illustrate analytical solutions to a problem.
7. Simulation models do not necessarily require the simplifying assumptions that may be required to make analytical models tractable. Consequently, a simulation model may well be the most realistic model possible.

Application areas that have been studied successfully using simulation models are numerous and varied. Problems that are appropriate for simulation studies include:

- Activities of large production, inventory, warehousing, and distribution centers: To determine the flow of manufactured goods
- Operations at a large airport: To examine the effects of changes in policies, procedures, or facilities on maintenance schedules, hangar utilization, or even runway throughput
- Automobile traffic patterns: To determine how to build an interchange or how to sequence traffic lights at an existing intersection
- Computer interconnection networks: To determine the optimum capacity of data links under time varying data traffic conditions
- Meteorological studies: To determine future weather patterns

The process of building a simulation of a system is not entirely unlike the process of creating other types of models that have been discussed in this book. The problem
formulation phase of a simulation study involves defining a set of objectives and designing the overall layout of the project. Building a model of the actual system being studied involves abstracting the essential features of the system and making basic assumptions in order to obtain first a simple model, then enriching the model with enough detail to obtain a satisfactory approximation of the real system. Albert Einstein's advice that things should be made as simple as possible, but not simpler might be augmented by the complementary advice that a model need be only complex enough to support the objectives of the simulation study. Real objects and systems have a variety of attributes (physical, technical, economic, biological, social, etc.). In the process of modeling, it is not necessary to identify all system attributes, but rather to select just those that efficiently and specifically contribute to the objectives of the model and serve the needs of the modeler or analyst. (For example, if we were studying the structural properties of certain materials to be used in an aircraft, we would include such attributes as tensile strength and weight. And although we might also know the cost or reflectivity of the materials, these latter attributes do not contribute directly to the structural model at hand.) If unnecessary detail and realism are incorporated into the model, the model becomes expensive and unwieldy (although perhaps correct) and the advantages of simulation may be lost. Various types of simulation models are discussed in Section 8.2.

The analyst must then collect data that can be used to describe the environment in which a system operates. These data may describe observable production rates, aircraft landings, automobile traffic patterns, computer usage, or air flow patterns, and may be used later in experimentation. Extensive statistical analysis may be required in order to determine the distribution that describes the input data and whether the data are homogeneous over a period of time.

Coding the simulation often involves developing a program through the use of simulation languages or packages, as described in Section 8.4.

Verification of the simulation is done to ensure that the program behaves as expected and that it is consistent with the model that has been developed.

Validation tests whether the model that has been successfully developed is in fact a sufficiently accurate representation of the real system. This can be done by comparing simulation results with historical data taken from the real system, or by using the simulation to make predictions that can be compared to future behavior of the real system.

Experimental design is closely related to the original objectives of the study and is based on the nature of the available data. Once the nature and extent of the experimentation is fully defined, the production phase begins. Simulation runs are made, and system analysis is performed. In some cases, an optimization algorithm is coupled with the simulation model to find the optimal values for certain variables in the simulation that would produce optimal values for certain performance measures. For example, finding the optimal resource levels that would maximize throughput subject to some constraints such as allocated budget. This is known as simulation-optimization. Upon completion of these phases, final reports are made of observations and recommendations can be formulated.
Although we will not fully discuss all of these phases, we will look more carefully now at some specific techniques for creating discrete simulation models. We will also discuss the design of simulation experiments, the use of the results, and some of the software systems and languages that are commonly used as tools in developing simulations.
