# Appendix: Review of Essential Mathematics-Notation, Definitions, and Matrix Algebra


## A.1 VECTORS



A vector is generally considered to be a quantity having both magnitude and direction. In some cases, it is convenient to think of a vector as a line segment beginning at the origin of an n -dimensional rectangular coordinate system and terminating at a point in the n -space. The components, or elements, of the vector are the projections of the vector onto each of the coordinate axes. These projections form an n -tuple and completely describe the vector.

More typically, a vector is described simply as a point X in n -space and is denoted as

$$
X=\left(x_{1}, x_{2} \ldots, x_{n}\right)
$$

The set of all possible points, or n -tuples of real numbers, forms the real n -space, which is denoted by $\mathrm{R}^{\mathrm{n}}$.

If $\mathrm{X}=\left(\mathrm{x}_{1}, \mathrm{x}_{2}, \ldots, \mathrm{x}_{\mathrm{n}}\right)$ and $\mathrm{Y}=\left(\mathrm{y}_{1}, \mathrm{y}_{2}, \ldots, \mathrm{y}_{\mathrm{n}}\right)$ are vectors in $\mathrm{R}^{\mathrm{n}}$, then the sum $\mathrm{X}+\mathrm{Y}$ is an n -dimensional vector defined as

$$
X+Y=\left(x_{1}+y_{1}, x_{2}+y_{2}, \ldots, x_{n}+y_{n}\right)
$$

A vector $X$ can be multiplied by a real number scalar a to obtain

$$
\alpha X=\left(\alpha x_{1}, \alpha x_{2}, \ldots, \alpha x_{n}\right)
$$

A vector space over the set of real numbers is a set of vectors for which addition and scalar multiplication are defined. Additionally, the operations in the vector space must satisfy a certain set of axioms, including commutative, associative, and distributive laws. The set of vectors must include an identity element, that is, the zero vector ( $0,0, \ldots, 0$ ); and for every vector $X$, there must be an inverse $-X$, for which $X+(-X)$ is the zero vector.

A vector $Y$ is a linear combination of vectors $X_{1}, X_{2}, \ldots, X_{n}$ if it can be expressed as

$$
Y=\alpha_{1} X_{1}+\alpha_{2} X_{2}+\ldots+\alpha_{n} X_{n}
$$

where the $\alpha_{\mathrm{i}}$ are real numbers.
An $n$-dimensional vector space is said to be spanned by the set of vectors $\left\{X_{1}, X_{2}, \ldots, X_{n}\right\}$ if every vector in the space is some linear combination of $X_{1}, X_{2}, \ldots, X_{n}$. The set $\left\{X_{1}, X_{2}, \ldots\right.$, $\left.\mathrm{X}_{\mathrm{n}}\right\}$ is then called a spanning set for the vector space.

A set of vectors $\left\{X_{1}, X_{2}, \ldots, X_{n}\right\}$ is linearly independent if no one vector can be expressed as a linear combination of the other vectors in the set; that is, if the equation

$$
\alpha_{1} X_{1}+\alpha_{2} X_{2}+\ldots+\alpha_{n} X_{n}=0
$$

can be satisfied only by setting all the $\alpha_{i}$ equal to zero. A set of vectors that is not linearly independent is linearly dependent. For example, two non-zero vectors $\mathrm{X}_{1}$ and $\mathrm{X}_{2}$ are linearly dependent if one of them is a non-zero scalar multiple of the other one; that is, if $\alpha_{1} X_{1}+\alpha_{2} X_{2}=0$ for some scalars $\alpha_{1}$ and $\alpha_{2}$ not both zero.

A set of vectors $\left\{X_{1}, X_{2}, \ldots, X_{n}\right\}$ is a basis for an $n$-dimensional vector space if the set spans the space and is linearly independent. The standard basis of an n -dimensional space consists of a set of unit vectors that comprise a basis; that is, a set of vectors in which the i -th vector $\mathrm{u}_{\mathrm{i}}$ has a 1 as the i -th element and zeros in all other positions. This standard basis is useful because of its simplicity and because of its obvious role as a basis for an n -dimensional vector space.
