# 7.3.3 Practical Limits of Queueing Models

In the previous sections, we attempted to give a very brief introduction to the simplest Queueing models and to the mathematical foundations underlying these models. When the systems being studied are more complex, we find that the analytical approach to
modeling their behavior grows dramatically in complexity. And for some systems, no analytical models have been developed that are applicable at all.
In selected applications, decomposing or partitioning the system may be a reasonable approach. For example, in a very complex multiple server system, we might simplify the analysis by just considering the servers that create the bottlenecks in the system, and in that way decompose the system into more manageable parts.
The problem of scheduling operating rooms in a hospital provides another good example. We may be able to learn much about the system by treating the operating rooms as a set of parallel identical servers. However, in reality the operating rooms are not identical; each one could be characterized by the unique equipment installed in the room. Therefore, it might be useful to partition the patients into several parallel streams of customers, each requiring a different group of identical operating theaters.
There are many examples of systems that involve certain characteristics of queueing models, but whose components do not fit into the standard roles of customers and servers as we have defined them, or whose customers and servers do not behave according to the simple paradigms to which the equations of analytical queueing models are applicable. In such systems, although we cannot directly and easily compute system characteristics such as average queue length, average time spent in a queue, server utilization, and so on, we might instead be able to write a computer program to play out and mimic the behavior of the entities in the system. By enacting this behavior under the control of a computer program, we can then also observe the performance of the simulated system, and, within the computer program, accumulate enough information about the system to then quantify the observed system characteristics. When this is done properly and skillfully, the results may be just as valuable and reliable as the analytical results that can be directly derived for simpler systems.
Although queueing analysis and simulation are often used to accomplish similar goals, the two approaches are quite different. Chapter 8 describes how to develop a simulation of a system, how to cause events to happen in the simulated system, how to make observations and gather data about the effects of these events in the simulated system, and thereby infer how the real system being modeled would behave and what some of its essential characteristics are.
