# 7.3 ANALYSIS OF SIMPLE QUEUEING SYSTEMS

## 7.3.1 Notation and Definitions


Although we will concentrate on only the simplest of queueing models, we will make use of a notational scheme that was developed by Kendall and Lee and that is commonly used to describe a variety of types of queueing systems (Lee 1966). The system characteristics are specified by the symbols

$$
\mathrm{A} / \mathrm{B} / \mathrm{C} / \mathrm{D} / \mathrm{E} / \mathrm{F}
$$

where:
A and B are letters that denote the interarrival time distribution and the service time distribution, respectively.
C is a number that denotes the number of parallel servers or channels.
D and E denote the system capacity and size of the calling source, respectively.
$F$ is an abbreviation identifying the queue discipline.
The codes used to denote arrival and service patterns are as follows:
M for exponential (Markovian) interarrivals and service times
D for constant (deterministic) times
$\mathrm{E}_{\mathrm{k}}$ for Erlang distributions with parameter k
GI for general independent distribution of interarrival times
G for general service times
The code for queue discipline may be FCFS (first-come, first-served), SIRO (service in random order), or any other designated priority scheme.
So, for example, a queueing system described as

$$
\mathrm{M} / \mathrm{M} / 1 / \infty / \infty / \mathrm{FCFS}
$$

is a single server system with exponential arrivals and departure patterns, infinite queue capacity and calling source, and a first-come, first-served queue discipline. This is the type of system we will study most thoroughly in this chapter. Of course, a variety of combinations of characteristics can be defined, but only a relatively small number of systems have been solved analytically.
Beyond this seemingly cryptic notation describing the essential characteristics of a queueing system, we need some additional definitions and notation to describe various performance measures. Determining these performance measures is, after all, our primary reason for creating analytical models of queueing systems. The following abbreviations are used almost universally and can be found in any textbook on queueing analysis.
$\lambda=$ Arrival rate (expected number of arrivals per unit time).
$\mu=$ Departure rate for customers of each server in the system (expected number of customers completing service and departing the system per unit time).
$\mathrm{s}=$ Number of parallel servers.
$\rho=\lambda / \mathrm{s} \mu=$ Utilization factor of the service facility (the expected fraction of time the servers are busy); sometimes called traffic intensity. Note that $\rho<1$ in order for the system to reach steady-state; otherwise, the customer load on the system grows increasingly large without bound.
$\mathrm{p}_{\mathrm{n}}=$ Steady state probability of the system being in state n , that is, of there being exactly n customers in the system. (Recall from our study of steady state Markov processes that this may be interpreted as the fraction of the time the system has exactly n customers.)
$\mathrm{L}=$ Expected number of customers in system.
$\mathrm{L}_{\mathrm{q}}=$ Expected number of customers in queue; mean length of queue.
W = Expected waiting time for each customer in the system (includes time spent in queue as well as service time).
$\mathrm{W}_{\mathrm{q}}=$ Expected waiting time spent in queue.
Certain relationships have been established between $\mathrm{L}, \mathrm{L}_{\mathrm{q}}, \mathrm{W}$, and $\mathrm{W}_{\mathrm{q}}$. Little's formula (Little 1961) states that $\mathrm{L}=\lambda \mathrm{W}$ and also that $\mathrm{L}_{\mathrm{q}}=\lambda \mathrm{W}_{\mathrm{q}}$. Also, because expected waiting time in the system equals expected time in queue plus expected service time, we have the formula $\mathrm{W}=\mathrm{W}_{\mathrm{q}}+1 / \mu$. Therefore, if we can compute any one of these four performance measures, we can use these relationships to compute the other three. But in order to do this, we need a way to compute the probabilities $\mathrm{p}_{\mathrm{n}}$. For this, we return to our birth-and-death process diagrams.
