# Introduction to Operations Research


## 1.1 THE ORIGINS AND APPLICATIONS OF OPERATIONS RESEARCH



Operations Research can be defined as the use of quantitative methods to assist analysts and decision-makers in designing, analyzing, and improving the performance or operation of systems. The systems being studied may be any kind of financial systems, scientific or engineering systems, or industrial systems; but regardless of the context, practically all such systems lend themselves to scrutiny within the systematic framework of the scientific method.

The field of Operations Research incorporates analytical tools from many different disciplines, which can be applied in a rational way to help decision-makers solve problems and control the operations of systems and organizations in the most practical or advantageous way. The tools of Operations Research can be used to optimize the performance of systems that are already well-understood, or to investigate the performance of systems that are ill-defined or poorly understood, perhaps to identify which aspects of the system are controllable (and to what extent) and which are not. In any case, mathematical, computational, and analytical tools and devices are employed merely to provide information and insight; and ultimately, it is the human decision-makers who will utilize and implement what has been learned through the analysis process to achieve the most favorable performance of the system.

The ideas and methodologies of Operations Research have been taking shape throughout the history of science and mathematics, but most notably since the Industrial Revolution. In various ways, all of human knowledge seems to play a role in determining the goals and limitations underlying the decisions people make. Physical laws (such as gravity and the properties of material substances), human motivations (such as greed, compassion, and philanthropy), economic concepts (supply and demand, resource scarcity, division of labor, skill levels, and wage differentials), the apparent fragility of the environment (erosion, species decline), and political issues (territorial aggression, democratic ideals) all eventually are evident, at least indirectly, in the many types of systems that are studied using the techniques of Operations Research. Some of these are the natural, physical, and mathematical laws that are inherent and that have been discovered through observation, while others have emerged as a result of the development of our society and civilization. Within the context of these grand themes, decision-makers are called upon to make specific decisions-whether to launch a missile, introduce a new commercial product, build a factory, drill a well, or plant a crop.

Operations Research (also called Management Science) became an identifiable discipline during the days leading up to World War II. In the 1930s, the British military buildup
centered around the development of weapons, devices, and other support equipment. The buildup was, however, of an unprecedented magnitude, and it became clear that there was also an urgent need to devise systems to ensure the most advantageous deployment and management of material and labor.
Some of the earliest investigations led to the development and use of radar for detecting and tracking aircraft. This project required the cooperative efforts of the British military and scientific communities. In 1938, the scientific experts named their component of this project operational research. The term operations analysis was soon used in the U.S. military to refer to the work done by teams of analysts from various traditional disciplines who cooperated during the war.
Wartime military operations and supporting activities included contributions from many scientific fields. Chemists were at work developing processes for producing high octane fuels; physicists were developing systems for the detection of submarines and aircraft; and statisticians were making contributions in the area of utility theory, game theory, and models for various strategic and tactical problems. To coordinate the effectiveness of these diverse scientific endeavors, mathematicians and planners developed quantitative management techniques for allocating scarce resources (raw materials, parts, time, and labor) among all the critical activities in order to achieve military and industrial goals. Informative overviews of the history of Operations Research in military operations are to be found in White (1985) and McArthur (1990).
The new analytical research on how best to conduct military operations had been remarkably successful, and after the conclusion of World War II, the skill and talent of the scientists that had been focused on military applications were immediately available for redirection to industrial, financial, and government applications. At nearly the same time, the advent of high speed electronic computers made feasible the complex and time consuming calculations required for many operations research techniques. Thus, the methodologies developed earlier for other purposes now became practical and profitable in business and industry.
In the early 1950s, interest in the subject was so widespread, both in academia and in industry, that professional societies sprang up to foster and promote the development and exchange of new ideas. The first was the Operational Research Society in Britain. In the U.S., the Operations Research Society of America (ORSA) and The Institute of Management Science (TIMS) were formed and operated more or less as separate societies until the 1990s. These two organizations, however, had a large and overlapping membership and served somewhat similar purposes, and have now merged into a single organization known as INFORMS (Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences). National societies in many other countries are active and are related through IFORS (the International Federation of Operational Research Societies). Within INFORMS, there are numerous special interest groups, and some specialized groups of researchers and practitioners have created separate societies to promote professional and scholarly endeavors in such areas as simulation, transportation, computation, optimization, decision sciences, and artificial intelligence. Furthermore, many mathematicians, computer scientists and engineers have interests that overlap those of operations researchers. Thus, the field of Operations Research is large and diverse. Some of the many activities and areas of research sponsored by INFORMS can be found at the website http://www.informs.org or in the journals associated with that organization. As will be apparent from the many illustrative applications presented throughout this book, the quantitative analysis techniques that found their first application nearly a hundred years ago are now used in many ways to influence our quality of life today.
