# 9.4 UTILITY THEORY


In Section 9.3, we made the assumption that people will choose the alternative that exhibits the highest expected value. Such people will be called EMVers for their use of expected monetary value. If a particular decision is to be repeated many times, then the EMV approach is perfectly sound. In the long run, the actual profit will be very close to the EMV sum of the individual decisions. Unfortunately, most practical decision processes apply to a single decision-making event.

For this reason, the vast majority of decision-makers do not rely solely on EMV, and will also make a subjective evaluation of the amount of risk involved in a decision. They will attempt to incorporate their attitude toward risk in a trade-off against the potential benefits of taking a chance.

As an experiment illustrating attitudes toward risk, we have tried the following game in our classes. We place $\$ 100$ on the table at the front of the room. We tell the class that we are going to flip a coin with one student. If a head comes up, the student wins the $\$ 100$; but if a tail occurs, we keep the money. We then ask the students what is the maximum amount that they would be willing to pay to play this game. (We will keep the money that they pay regardless of the flip.)

The EMV of this game is $\$ 50$, and from a strictly mathematical point of view, people should be willing to play for any amount up to $\$ 50$. However, students are generally not
wealthy people. They begin to think of the consequences of the gamble. If they lose, they might not eat tonight, or they might not have enough money to pay the rent. If they win, they could take their friends out to dinner, but the value of winning does not compensate them for the risk of losing $\$ 50$. Over the years, we have observed that the average amount that students are willing to risk for this gamble is around $\$ 20$. (One student was willing to play for $\$ 75$, but he was probably independently wealthy.)

People's willingness to use an EMV decision rule depends on their ability to absorb the potential loss. For relatively small values, they can afford to rely on EMV; but as the stakes increase, most people exhibit an aversion to risk. For example, few corporate decision-makers (in medium sized companies) would be willing to risk $\$ 400,000$ for a $50-50$ chance of earning $\$ 1,000,000$. The prospect of such a substantial loss would be considered too risky.

It is important to distinguish between gambling and decision-making. The previous example with the students was clearly a gambling situation. It was a game, and the students had a choice of whether or not they wanted to play the game. However, in the real world of decision-making, the decision-maker is forced to pick one of several uncertain alternatives. Another distinction between gambling and decision-making is illustrated by the student who was willing to pay $\$ 75$ to play the game. This student was a gambler, whereas the others were making a rational decision about their ability to pay versus the potential gains. In the quest for success, we cannot avoid taking some chances, but we can certainly avoid being foolish. In casino gambling, for example, the odds, in the long run, always favor the house.

Utility theory gives us a tool for characterizing an individual's attitude toward risk. It is based on the idea that people will associate an implicit value or utility with any given outcome that is not necessarily proportional to the associated dollar (monetary) value. For example, a particular individual may feel that the negative value associated with a loss of $\$ 100$ is compensated by the positive value of a gain of $\$ 500$. He would consider the utility or value of the two outcomes to be equal and opposite. A 50-50 chance of losing \$100 or gaining $\$ 500$ would be fair within his personal value system. Utility theory allows us to assign values to these outcomes which reflect this attitude.
