# 1.5 SOFTWARE FOR OPERATIONS RESEARCH


Each chapter in this book contains a section on software tools, in which there is a brief description of some of the most popular software currently available for solving the types of problems studied in the chapter. The principles and methods presented in each chapter are intended to provide the foundations necessary for building and understanding appropriate models. The authors' aim is to encourage an adequate understanding of the mathematical principles and methods for solving problems so that students can become informed users of the software that is available to them.

Because there is no single software system that is capable of solving all optimization and system analysis problems, the user must be knowledgeable enough about the various classes of problems to make a selection of appropriate software packages. Thus, being able to build a mathematical model of a problem and being able to identify that model as
a linear program, integer program, or network problem, for example, not only helps to clarify the model, but also puts the analyst well on the way to selecting the right software for solving the problem.
The most visible users of commercial software may be the people who actually run application systems that contain optimization modules. However, playing even more essential roles in the process are the analysts who formulate the mathematical models and who adapt and refine the standard algorithms, and the developers of the software packages who incorporate optimization modules (sometimes called solvers), together with application systems and user interfaces. In our discussions, we will address various practical issues that are important to all software users.
The references to software products in this and subsequent chapters are by no means exhaustive and are not intended to comprise a comprehensive catalog of available software. Instead, we hope to give readers a feel for the types of products that are on the market and that may deserve their consideration when selecting implementations for practical applications.
Note also that our references to software tools are not intended to represent endorsement of any specific software products. Rather, we merely mention examples from the broad range of software available for the various application areas and offer short descriptions of selected software packages and libraries, in order to create an awareness of the general capabilities of typical software, as well as some of the questions, difficulties, or limitations that might arise during the development or use of software for solving real problems.
New products are being introduced rapidly, and it would be impossible to maintain a perfectly up-to-date list of software tools. Advertisements and published product reviews are helpful and, in particular, the software reviews that appear frequently in issues of OR/MS Today are an extremely valuable source of information.
We have avoided making any comparisons of products on the basis of performance or cost. Performance depends on the underlying hardware as well as on the frequent updates and modifications that occur during the evolutionary development of the software. Software prices vary rapidly, depending on competition in the market, whether the purchaser or user is in academia or industry, and whether copies are sold for installations in individual workstations, client/server, or cloud-based versions intended for multiple users. More expensive commercial versions of some software may handle larger problem models and solutions, while the less expensive personal versions or student versions may be limited in the size of problems that can be solved.
In light of the above considerations, a few of the pertinent characteristics and features that will likely play a role in the reader's consideration of software products are highlighted. Each chapter's discussion covers software related to the topics covered in that chapter. In this first chapter, no specific solution methods are introduced; however, there is discussion of some of the general principles of building mathematical models. Thus, some software systems that facilitate the construction of models (i.e., modeling languages and environments) and the preparation of model parameters and characteristics are identified. These representations of models can then be introduced as input to various other software solution generators, or solvers.
One way to create a problem model to be solved with a specialized solver is to use a general-purpose programming language (such as C, C++, Python, or Java) and write a program to format input parameters appropriately and to generate output reports in the desired form. The advantages of this approach are that such languages are typically available and usable on any hardware, and there is no need to purchase and learn a new language or package.

An analyst who creates models in this way can then choose to solve the problem using available software such as is found in the IMSL Mathematical Subroutine Library. A comprehensive collection of approximately 1300 mathematical and statistical functions and user-callable subroutines is capable of solving most of the types of problems that will be studied later in this book. The IMSL libraries are ideal for programmers skilled in C, C\#, Java, and Fortran, and are available for use on Windows, Unix, Linux and MAC computers. The IMSL software system has been used by developers worldwide for four decades, and is still considered by many to offer valuable autonomy to the user and thereby accelerate development of applications in many contexts (Demirci 1996).

The initial simplicity and low-cost investment associated with this approach, however, may be paid for in the long term, as code written and customized for one modeling project may not be directly transferrable and reusable on subsequent projects. Nevertheless, there can be some value in maintaining direct in-house control over the development and construction of software solutions.

For some types of problems, the row and column (tabular) orientation of problem parameters offered by many spreadsheet programs is easy to create and read; and although the analyst loses some flexibility, many problems lend themselves nicely to the spreadsheet framework. Moreover, many solvers can read and write directly to spreadsheet files.

A much more powerful means for creating models is through the use of algebraic modeling languages. These languages permit the user to define the structure of a model and declare the data to be incorporated into the structure. An algebraic modeling language accepts as input the analyst's algebraic view of the model, and creates a representation of the model in a form that the solver algorithm can use. It also allows the analyst to design the desired output reports to be produced after the solver has completed its work. Modeling languages can be bundled with a solver or optimization module, or can allow the user to customize an application system by selecting the best optimization component for the job. Among the most commonly used modeling languages are the following.

AMPL, a modeling language for mathematical programming, is an integrated software package for describing and solving a variety of types of problems. Developed initially by AT\&T Bell Labs, it is a complex and powerful language that enables model developers to effectively utilize the system's sophisticated underlying capabilities. AMPL is a command and model interpreter that is available in Windows, Linux, MacOS, and several Unix-based workstations, and interfaces with over 30 powerful optimization engines including MINOS, CPLEX, OSL, GUROBI, and many of the most widely used large-scale solvers. AMPL features an integrated scripting language, provides access to spreadsheet and database files, and has application programming interfaces for embedding within larger systems. A review of AMPL and its use can be found in Fourer et al. (1993) and at www.ampl.com.
MPL is a mathematical programming language that is considered one of the earliest integrated model development systems that supports input and output through interfaces with databases and spreadsheets. MPL is most commonly used with Windows and interfaces with and supports almost all commercial solvers.
LINGO is a thoroughly integrated modeling language and solver that interfaces with the entire LINDO system family of linear and nonlinear problem-solvers. (LINDO products are mentioned in several subsequent chapters, as this line of software offers application tools for a wide variety of types of problems, as further
described at www.lindo.com.) This powerful modeling language features a convenient environment for expressing problems, facilitates using information directly from text files, spreadsheets, and databases, provides access to a comprehensive set of built-in solvers that handles a wide range of model types, and generates output reports as well as graphical displays during and upon completion of the solution process. LINGO runs on Windows, Mac and Linux systems.
AIMMS has emerged from its original role as a basic modeling language into a comprehensive, innovative technology company offering sophisticated modeling and solution platforms that support both strategic and operational optimization, decisions, planning and scheduling. A full description of AIMMS is available at www.aimms.com.
SAS/OR OPTMODEL is an optimization modeling language that uses a flexible algebraic syntax for model formulation for different types of mathematical programming problems including linear, mixed integer and nonlinear programming.
GAMS, a general algebraic modeling system, was one of the earliest developed modeling languages, and is now among the most well known and widely used modeling systems for large scale optimization. GAMS links to libraries and programming languages, databases and spreadsheet files, and runs on Windows, Macintosh, Linux, and IBM platforms. GAMS is best known for its sophisticated solvers for the full range of optimization problems and for its graphical interface generator. More information on this system may be found at www.gams.com.

Software for Operations Research is also available through the Internet. As any knowledgeable computer user must know, products (be they information, software, or more tangible items) offered on the Internet may not always be subject to the same standards of quality and control that are imposed on other avenues of commerce. The source, authenticity, quality, and reliability of software or any other information posted on the Internet may be difficult to confirm. Despite these concerns, the Internet has nevertheless become one of the most exciting sources of information available today. With so many kinds of services available online, it makes sense that computational and analytical services and tools should be found there, too. For example, in 1994, a group of researchers at Argonne National Laboratory and Northwestern University launched a project known as the Network-Enabled Optimization System (NEOS), which now includes a large number of solvers that accepts models in various formats, solves them on remote servers, and presents the results to the user for free. The NEOS server is hosted by the Wisconsin Institute for Discovery at the University of Wisconsin in Madison, and provides access to more than 60 state-of-the-art solvers in more than a dozen optimization categories. Solvers hosted by the University of Wisconsin run on distributed high-performance machines; remote solvers run on machines at Argonne National Laboratory, Arizona State University, the University of Klagenfurt in Austria, and the University of Minho in Portugal. The NEOS project has been effective in providing information, communication, and high quality software as a valuable service to the operations research community.
Of great interest also is the COmputational INfrastructure for Operations Research, known as COIN-OR, which is a project dedicated to providing open-source software for the Operations Research community (Lougee-Heimer 2008). It encourages and supports the development of high-quality software suitable for use by a broad range of practitioners, educators, and students working in industry, academia and government. This collection of robust and portable software includes computational tools powerful enough for
large collaborative project development, yet accessible to less experienced users as well. Much of the software is structured into building blocks which may be modified to suit the needs of an individual user and combined to create customized application packages. Software components have been used compatibly with proprietary languages and software products. COIN-OR software modules are available for constrained optimization, linear and nonlinear, continuous and discrete problems. Source distributions are provided in standard open source configuration, and precompiled binary distributions are available for Windows and Linux on Intel and AMD platforms, and for Mac OS X on Intel and Power PC platforms.

COIN-OR began in the year 2000 as an initiative of IBM Research, and was incorporated four years later as an independent nonprofit foundation responsible for directing the activities of the organization. Professional technical leaders from universities and research laboratories have continued to work diligently since the founding of COIN-OR to standardize the infrastructure and maintain a stable and reliable repository of software. INFORMS computing and optimization societies regularly sponsor workshops and conference clusters to acquaint prospective users with the wide variety of freely available software that serves the computational needs of operations researchers. Further information about this ambitious and valuable project may be found at www.coin-or.org.

The open source movement has demonstrated over the years that high quality software systems can actually be produced by contributors who volunteer their time and experience to make their products available for other people, hoping that in return people will contribute back. This has been an interesting approach that showed tremendous success and even for-profit companies started to participate in this model as it turned out that it pays off on the long run. For example, Google offers open source codes and binaries for Operations Research tools (solvers, interfaces, algorithms) in different computer languages and for different operating systems. More is available on Google's website.
