# 3.10 SUMMARY


Network analysis is applicable to an enormous variety of problems that can be modeled as networks and optimized using network algorithms. Some of the systems represent physical networks for transportation or flow of commodities, while others are more abstract and can be used to model processes or plan and manage projects.
A maximum flow algorithm optimizes the total flow of an entity through a network in which links have capacities that limit the flow. This algorithm not only determines the greatest possible flow, but in so doing also locates and identifies the bottlenecks in the network.
Transportation models find the minimum cost flow from an origin, through a network, to a destination, subject to supply and demand requirements. The transportation Simplex algorithm is often used for this optimization problem. A slight refinement in the interpretation of the transportation model results in an assignment problem, which is used to model the matching or assignment of two sets of entities in the most advantageous way.
Maintaining network connectivity has important practical implications. Minimum cost spanning trees provide a simple and useful means of addressing the connectivity issue. When appropriate connections between nodes do exist in a network, it is often useful to find the shortest route between two specified nodes. Simple labeling algorithms provide solutions to this problem, and also inspire a broader approach known as dynamic programming. Dynamic programming has far-ranging applications, but generally can be viewed as a way to model decisions that take place in stages over a period of time.
Project activity networks are used to plan and coordinate large complex projects consisting of many tasks. Critical paths in networks determine the minimum project completion time, and identify those tasks or activities whose timely completion is critical to achieving this minimum project duration.

## KEY TERMS

activity <br>
acyclic graph <br>
arcs <br>
assignment problem <br>
backward pass <br>
bipartite graph <br>
capacitated transshipment <br>
chain <br>
connected graph <br>
critical activity <br>
critical event <br>
critical path <br>
critical path method <br>
crash completion time <br>
crash cost <br>
crash limit <br>
crashing <br>
critical event <br>
cut <br>
cut set <br>
cycle <br>
cyclic path <br>
decision variable <br>
degree of a node <br>
demand <br>
Dijkstra's algorithm <br>
directed chain <br>
directed graph <br>
dynamic programming <br>
dynamic programming principle of optimality <br>
earliest time <br>
events <br>
expected project duration <br>
expected time <br>
flow <br>
Ford-Fulkerson algorithm <br>
forward pass <br>
graph <br>
Hungarian method <br>
isolated node <br>
latest time <br>
longest path <br>
maximum flow <br>
minimum cost method <br>
minimum row cost method <br>
minimum spanning tree <br>
multiple sinks <br>
multiple sources <br>
network <br>
node-arc incidence matrix <br>
nodes <br>
northwest corner rule <br>
path <br>
PERT <br>
predecessor <br>
Prim's algorithm <br>
project management <br>
shortest network problem <br>
shortest path <br>
sink <br>
slack time <br>
source <br>
spanning tree <br>
stable matching <br>
stages <br>
states <br>
Steiner tree <br>
successor <br>
supply <br>
transportation problem <br>
transportation Simplex <br>
tree <br>
undirected graph <br>
unstable matching <br>
variance <br>
