# 1.7 SUMMARY


Operations Research consists of the use of quantitative methods for analysis, optimization, and decision-making. The ideas and methods of Operations Research began to take shape during World War II, and thereafter have been put to good use in a wide variety of industrial, financial, government, nonprofit, and scientific endeavors.

Central to the theory and practice of Operations Research is the use of mathematical models to represent real systems or processes. A skillfully constructed model embodies enough of the details of the real entity being modeled so that it captures the essential characteristics of the entity, yet is simple enough so that the model can be studied using standard analytical techniques. In addition, successful modeling depends on a human analyst's knowledge, experience, intuition, and good judgment.
Algorithms are computational processes that can be applied to the structures within mathematical models. The performance of algorithms is often measured by the amount of computer time required to apply the algorithm. Depending on the type of problem being solved, algorithms may execute very rapidly (efficiently), or their execution may take so long that the algorithm is essentially worthless for actual problems. This book makes a special point of indicating, where possible, just what level of performance can be expected of each of the computational methods presented in this and subsequent chapters.
Many algorithms are designed to solve their targeted problems perfectly; but with imperfect or incomplete models and uncertain data, and the limited numerical accuracy of computer hardware, it should be recognized that it may be more sensible and easily justifiable to develop problem solutions that are less than optimal, but adequate for a given application. It may be necessary to compromise the quality of solutions in order to obtain solutions within a reasonable amount of computation time.

## KEY TERMS

accumulated round-off error <br>
algebraic modeling languages<br>
algorithm<br>
average case performance<br>
best case performance<br>
big-Oh notation<br>
decision making<br>
exponential-time algorithms<br>
mathematical model<br>
mathematical optimization<br>
mathematical programming<br>
model<br>
NP-complete<br>
NP-hard<br>
polynomial-time algorithms<br>
problem size<br>
round-off error<br>
solvable problems<br>
solvers<br>
step count<br>
undecidable problems<br>
unsolvable problems<br>
worst case performance<br>
