# 6.9 ILLUSTRATIVE APPLICATIONS

## 6.9.1 Water Reservoir Operations (Wang and Adams 1986)


The operation of a water reservoir is determined by a sequence of decisions concerning the volume of water to be released during a time period. Optimizing the operations involves finding a set of optimal release decisions over successive time periods to maximize the expected total reward associated with long-term operation of the reservoir. This process can be viewed as a Markov system by discretizing reservoir storage volumes into a finite number of states, and treating the release events as transitions among the storage states from one time period to the next.

An optimization method developed for general water reservoir management was applied to the Dan River Issue Reservoir on a tributary of the Yangtze River. A two stage analysis framework involved a real-time model followed by a steady-state model. Each time period was analyzed by using information about the current reservoir storage state and historical information (gathered over a period of 30 years) of inflow into the reservoir. Thus, the Markov process is derived from transition probabilities based on stochastic inflow data, coupled with operational decisions for releasing water from the reservoir.

The objectives in this Yangtze River case were flood control, production of hydroelectric power, and the ability to augment the flow of water during low seasons. Analysts developed operational standards for each activity. The rewards obtained through operation of the reservoir were measured as revenues resulting from electric power production minus
penalties to account for failures to meet targeted standards of operation. Average annual rewards computed in this way are the primary performance criterion for this system, but additional indicators of performance include average annual energy production and probabilities of the occurrence of various undesirable scenarios associated with floods and low flow.
The optimal operating strategies derived from the Markov analysis represented significant performance improvements of $14 \%$ for average annual reward, and $3.6 \%$ for average annual power production, when compared with conventional strategies or the results of deterministic optimization. Steady state optimization yielded increases in both power production and the effectiveness of flood control.

Because of the magnitude of the annual revenues from the operation of such a major reservoir, the modest percentage improvements represent substantial actual increases in economic returns. Furthermore, the analysis undertaken for the Yangtze River project was intended to be used for real-time operational decisions, so it was especially valuable that this optimization method turned out to execute in a reasonable amount of time. This computational efficiency, together with the profitability obtained through the optimization process, indicate that the steady-state Markov analysis is an effective component in this decision system for real-time operation of a multi-purpose, large-scale water reservoir.
