# 6.9.3 Markov Models for Manufacturing Production Capability (Foster and Garcia-Diaz 1983)


A Markov analysis has been used to identify the steady-state production capability of manufacturing systems. For specified reliability and maintainability characteristics, the model tracks failures in a multi-unit manufacturing system. Certain assumptions are necessary. First, although the manufacturing system is a continuous-time process, in this case, it is assumed that it can be accurately modeled as a discrete-time Markov chain if the time increments are small enough. Second, the issue of stationarity must be addressed. It is assumed that the probability that a functioning element in the system becomes nonoperational in a given interval is independent of the length of time it has been functioning.
In this analysis, the term failure refers to any activity, event, or condition causing a decrease in production rate (breakdown, policy change, supply shortage, etc.), while the term repair refers to any condition causing an increase in production rate. Each element in the multi-unit system can be classified as either catastrophic (one whose failure causes the entire system to shut down immediately), dependent (one that cannot be repaired while other elements are in operation), or independent (one that can be repaired while other elements are operating).
Three models are developed. For the model consisting of only catastrophic elements, each element has a constant probability of failure and a constant probability of repair. In the model consisting of only dependent elements, all elements have the same probability of failure. The system fails when a specified number of elements have failed, and the probability of system repair is constant over time. Once the system is repaired, all units are functioning again. In the third model, all elements are independent, with the same probability of failure. A specified number of elements can be considered for repair at any given time, and the probability that an element is repaired is constant.

For each of these cases, a transition probability matrix specifies how an initially, fully operational system evolves through stages of element failure, system failure, and repair phases. A steady-state analysis is used to determine such characteristics as the expected steady-state production rate for each specified number of element failures, and the probability of the entire system being down for repairs. As applied to a bottling machine, this analysis led to an optimal repair policy; in particular, it was determined that 2 of the 24 elements should be allowed to fail before the system is shut down for repairs. Under this policy, a system with a peak production capability of 1,200 bottles per minute can achieve an expected production rate of 879 bottles per minute.
