# 9.8 SUMMARY


Decision analysis involves aspects of both mathematics and psychology. Because of the uncertainty that often surrounds decision-making, it is important to analyze the decision process as objectively as possible, and yet to realize the important role played by the human psyche.

Human attitudes toward risk and uncertainty often interfere with rational decisionmaking. Strategies in game theory help to identify and explain these attitudes, and several principles have been proposed that attempt to characterize human perspectives on risk. Utility theory gives us a mechanism for quantifying human attitudes toward risk.

Decision trees provide a framework for representing sequential decisions in which there is a response or some type of feedback at every stage in the decision process. Through the use of probabilistic information, optimal strategies can be identified and evaluated, using such measures as expected monetary value.

Decision-makers are prone to a variety of misconceptions and idiosyncratic behavior that can severely limit their ability to make rational choices. The availability of information can influence people in surprising ways. People are often unwilling to modify their decisions even when additional relevant information or evidence becomes available to them; or they may feel trapped by earlier decisions. Proper training and education can often help analysts develop an awareness of the psychological difficulties associated with decisions. Such an awareness, along with an understanding of the quantitative methods that are available to facilitate decision-making, can encourage and foster more rational approaches toward dealing with decisions.

## KEY TERMS

Allais Paradox <br>
adjustment <br>
anchoring <br>
automatic correction <br>
availability <br>
Bayes rule <br>
certain monetary equivalent <br>
chance fork <br>
decision fork <br>
decision simulator <br>
decision strategy <br>
decision tree <br>
decision variables <br>
dissonance <br>
dissonance reduction <br>
dominance <br>
dominate <br>
entrapment <br>
expected monetary value <br>
expected value of perfect information <br>
feedback <br>
folding back <br>
framing effect <br>
gambler's fallacy <br>
gate <br>
Hurwicz measure <br>
Hurwicz principle <br>
Laplace principle <br>
lottery <br>
maximax strategy <br>
maximin strategy <br>
outcomes <br>
payoff matrix <br>
payoffs <br>
preference function <br>
principle of insufficient reason <br>
redundant questions <br>
risk averse <br>
risk seeking <br>
row linearity <br>
Savage Minimax regret <br>
state variables <br>
states of nature <br>
sunk cost fallacy <br>
toll <br>
utility curve <br>
utility function <br>
utility theory <br>
