# 10 Heuristic and Metaheuristic Techniques for Optimization



Combinatorial optimization involves determining how best to arrange (or group, sequence, or assign) the controllable elements in large complex systems to achieve a specified objective or goal. Combinatorial optimization models have been used to describe problems as diverse as vehicle routing, workforce scheduling, manufacturing plant layout, portfolio selection, production scheduling, supply chain problems, aircraft scheduling, computer CPU job scheduling among many others. Combinatorial problems are ubiquitous, arising commonly in engineering, financial, industrial, computing, and social and human services applications.

Many combinatorial optimization problems are remarkably simple to state and intuitively easy to understand, requiring little mathematical sophistication. As an example, there is a famous problem popularly known as the knapsack problem in which a hiker considers which of n objects to pack into a knapsack. Each object has a weight and a value. The goal is to select a subset of the objects that have the greatest combined value and whose total weight does not exceed the capacity of the knapsack.

The knapsack model could be applied to as obvious a problem as packing suitcases for a trip without exceeding the baggage weight limitations imposed by airline regulations. Or the model could be used to select experiments and instrumentation packages to include in a deep space probe. Each candidate package has a potential value (technical payoff or social merit), but each package also requires certain resources such as electricity, cooling, oxygen for the mice, carbon dioxide for the soybean sprouts, space (volume) needs, weight, or waste disposal. For these requirements, one might imagine a multidimensional knapsack capacity which can supply only a limited amount of each of the resources (electricity, air, heat dissipation, space, and weight).

The simple knapsack problem can be formulated using n decision variables, $\mathrm{x}_{\mathrm{i}}$, where $\mathrm{x}_{\mathrm{i}}=1$ if object i is to be included in the knapsack and $\mathrm{x}_{\mathrm{i}}=0$ if not. Knapsack capacity is denoted as c . For each object, there is an associated weight $\mathrm{w}_{\mathrm{i}}$ and a value $\mathrm{v}_{\mathrm{i}}$. Then, to select the most valuable feasible subset of objects, it is necessary to find the values of the variables to

$$
\begin{aligned}
\operatorname{maximize} & \sum_{i=1}^{n} v_{i} x_{i} \\
\text { subject to } & \sum_{i=1}^{n} w_{i} x_{i} \leq c \\
& x_{i}=1 \text { or } 0
\end{aligned}
$$

Another famous combinatorial optimization problem, known as the traveling salesman problem, seeks to find the least costly route for a salesman who must visit n cities each exactly once, returning finally to his city of origin. Assume that the distances between cities are recorded in an $\mathrm{n} \times \mathrm{n}$ matrix D , where $\mathrm{d}_{\mathrm{ij}}$ is the distance (or cost) to travel from city i to city j . Let decision variables $\mathrm{x}_{\mathrm{ij}}=1$ if the route contains the road from i to j , and $\mathrm{x}_{\mathrm{ij}}=0$ if not. If the salesman enters and leaves every city exactly once, it appears that his tour would be a feasible one, and the optimal tour can be determined by finding values of the variables to:

$$
\begin{array}{ll}
\operatorname{minimize} & \sum_{i=1}^{n} \sum_{j=1}^{n} d_{i j} x_{i j} \\
\text { subject to } & \sum_{i=1}^{n} x_{i j}=1 \\
& \sum_{j=1}^{n} x_{i j}=1 \\
& x_{i j}=1 \text { or } 0
\end{array}
$$

At first glance, this familiar formulation (which is precisely that of the assignment problem discussed in Section 3.3.2) might tempt us to try to solve the traveling salesman problem using the Hungarian method for the assignment problem. Indeed, if the solution found by the Hungarian method really were a feasible tour, then it would be an optimal tour for the salesman. However, the solution obtained in this way may fail to represent the kind of tour needed by the salesman, although he enters and leaves each city exactly once. For example, suppose the salesman begins at city 1 , and must visit cities 2,3 , and 4 in any order, and finally return to city 1 . Then, all of the following tours are feasible:

$$
\begin{aligned}
& 1-2-3-4-1 \\
& 1-2-4-3-1 \\
& 1-3-2-4-1 \\
& 1-3-4-2-1 \\
& 1-4-2-3-1 \\
& 1-4-3-2-1
\end{aligned}
$$

However, notice that the constraints written in the previous formulation would permit decision variable values that describe not only those six feasible tours but also sub-tours (round trips that do not visit every city) such as:

$$
\begin{aligned}
& 1-2-1 \text { and } 3-4-3 \\
& 1-3-1 \text { and } 4-2-4 \\
& 1-4-1 \text { and } 2-3-2
\end{aligned}
$$

These latter solutions do not meet the salesman's requirements. Thus, the Hungarian Method cannot be relied upon to yield feasible traveling salesman problem solutions; additional constraints must be imposed in our formulation so that subtours are excluded.
As simple and easy to understand as these two famous combinatorial problems are, it is surprising that no efficient algorithms have been developed that are guaranteed to find optimal feasible solutions. In fact, both the hard problem and the traveling salesman problem belong to the set of NP-hard problems, and in that set, they are in good company with hundreds of other important practical problems.
For many practical problems in science, engineering, and management, the only way to be sure of finding an optimal solution is to search completely through the whole set of possible solutions. If there are infinitely many possible solutions, we know right away that this approach is unsatisfactory. But if there is a very large but finite number of possible solutions, the idea of a complete search is tempting, and often is quite easy to express as an algorithm and to implement in software. The difficulty is of course that the time required to carry out such an exhaustive search is, although finite, far greater than most mortals can afford. (Look again at Table 1.1 in Chapter 1 to be reminded just how many centuries such a computation might take. Clearly, technological advances, such as increasing CPU chip speed by several orders of magnitude, do not provide adequate computational tools against these formidable computational demands.)
The question then is to try to find short cuts that will allow us to organize the search process so that it is no longer a complete search over all possible solutions, but rather it becomes an affordable search that is likely to discover a good, or near-optimal, solution. Such methods are called heuristic methods. They are most often applied to the computationally intractable NP problems, simply because otherwise the best (most efficient) methods we know of for solving these problems exactly (or optimally) can take an exponential amount of computation time. Heuristic methods are usually rather problem specific, and often are based on simple common-sense ideas inspired by, or tailored to, the type of problem being solved. They are, however, vulnerable to falling into local optima (i.e., suboptimal solutions). As a result, metaheuristics emerged as more intelligent search techniques that can help heuristics escape such solutions. This chapter examines some heuristic and metaheuristic methods that are currently popular, effective, and practical.

## 10.1 GREEDY HEURISTICS



Greedy heuristics are probably the simplest type of heuristics in which a partial solution is constructed step by step towards a complete solution based on basic known information of a problem instance. This can be accomplished by adding elements based on certain attribute(s) and in some cases based on the best contribution an element makes to the objective function at the point at which the element is selected. They also must make sure that the constraints on the problems are not violated. In their most basic form, greedy heuristics do not account for long term consequences of the decision made, but they rather consider the immediate impact in the short term; hence the term used is greedy.
As an example, consider again the traveling salesman problem discussed earlier. A greedy way of constructing a complete tour is to select the closest unvisited city next until all cities are visited. Suppose the distance matrix for a four city example is as given in Table 10.1. A greedy solution using this heuristic would be $1-3-2-4-1$ with a total distance of 52 .

**TABLE 10.1** <br>
| Traveling Salesman Problem Example |  |  |  |  |
| :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: |
| City | $\mathbf{1}$ | $\mathbf{2}$ | $\mathbf{3}$ | $\mathbf{4}$ |
| 1 |  | 20 | 4 | 25 |
| 2 | 20 |  | 8 | 15 |
| 3 | 4 | 8 |  | 11 |
| 4 | 25 | 15 | 11 |  |


Note that even for a small example like this, the greedy heuristic obtained a reasonable solution; yet it is suboptimal as the optimal tour for this instance is $1-2-4-3-1$ with a total distance of 50.
It is very common to use greedy heuristics as a starting solution followed by a local search heuristic in which a better solution is sought by iteratively attempting to improve the greedy solution. This concept is discussed next.
