# 3.3.3 Capacitated Transshipment Problem


The most general form of the minimum cost network flow problem arises when some commodity is to be distributed from sources to destinations. Each node can create a certain supply or absorb some demand of the commodity. It is not necessary for each unit of the commodity to be shipped directly from a source to a destination; instead, it may be transshipped indirectly through intermediate nodes on its way to its destination. In fact, the total supply could conceivably be routed through any node in transit. Links can have upper and lower bounds on the flow that may be assigned to them. The object then is to meet the demands without exceeding the available supply, and to do so at minimum cost. This model is known as a minimum cost flow problem or as a capacitated transshipment problem. We let $\mathrm{x}_{\mathrm{ij}}$ represent the number of units shipped along the arc from node i to node j , and $\mathrm{c}_{\mathrm{ij}}$ denote the per unit cost of that shipment. Capacities are specified by lower bounds $\ell_{\mathrm{ij}}$ and upper bounds $\mathrm{u}_{\mathrm{ij}}$ on each arc from node i to node j . Flow balance equations enforce the constraint for a net supply $\mathrm{s}_{\mathrm{i}}$ at each node i . The net supply at a node is
expressed as total flow out minus total flow in. (If $\mathrm{s}_{\mathrm{i}}$ is negative, it will be interpreted as a net demand constraint.) The formulation is as follows:

$$
\begin{array}{lll}
\text { minimize } & \mathrm{z}=\sum_{\mathrm{i}=1}^{\mathrm{n}} \sum_{\mathrm{j}=1}^{\mathrm{n}} \mathrm{c}_{\mathrm{ij}} \mathrm{x}_{\mathrm{ij}} & \\
\text { subject to } & \sum_{\mathrm{j}=1}^{\mathrm{n}} \mathrm{x}_{\mathrm{ij}}-\sum_{\mathrm{k}=1}^{\mathrm{n}} \mathrm{x}_{\mathrm{ki}}=\mathrm{s}_{\mathrm{i}} & \text { for } \mathrm{i}=1, \ldots, \mathrm{n} \\
& \ell_{\mathrm{ij}} \leq \mathrm{x}_{\mathrm{ij}} \leq \mathrm{u}_{\mathrm{ij}} & \text { for all } \mathrm{i} \text { and } \mathrm{j} 
\end{array}
$$

Summations are taken over all index values for which the corresponding arcs exist in the network. To keep the notation simple, we assume that $\ell_{\mathrm{ij}}=\mathrm{u}_{\mathrm{ij}}=0$ for all non-existent arcs.

Most introductory textbooks that describe the transshipment problem, explain how it can be modeled as an expanded transportation problem with dummy demands and supplies for each intermediate node. The two models are, in fact, equivalent. And although that approach will work for small problems, it is not recommended for any applications of practical size.
The minimum cost network flow problem could also be solved using the Simplex method presented in Chapter 2. However, the special structure in the formulation makes the problem amenable to more efficient solution techniques. The structure is apparent in the flow balance equations (constraints [1] in our previous formulation). The variables $\mathrm{x}_{\mathrm{ij}}$ appear with coefficients of only $0,+1$, and -1 in each equation. And because each arc flows into exactly one node and out of exactly one node, each variable appears in exactly two of the flow balance equations. This matrix of coefficients is known as a node-arc incidence matrix and is fundamental to the methods that have been tailored for use on this problem.
One efficient technique for solving the minimum cost flow problem is a specialization of Dantzig's Simplex algorithm, and has been called the Simplex on a graph algorithm (Kennington 1980). One implementation of this method is reported to be over 100 times faster than a general linear programming code applied to the minimum cost flow problem.
Another method, developed by Fulkerson specifically for the minimum cost flow problem, is called the out-of-kilter algorithm. Each arc is either in kilter or out of kilter, indicating whether that arc could be in a minimum cost solution. Kilter numbers specify how far an arc is from being in kilter. Beginning with any maximum feasible flow, the algorithm repeatedly selects an out-of-kilter arc, and adjusts the flow in the network so as to reduce the kilter number of the chosen arc, while not increasing the kilter number of any other arc, and maintaining feasible flow. When all arcs are in kilter, the current solution is the minimum cost flow. Clear and complete descriptions of this method may be found in several of the references cited at the end of this chapter, including Kennington (1980), Price (1971), Battersby (1967, 1970), Hu (1970), and Tarjan (1983).

The following example, from Glover and Klingman (1992), illustrates the creative use of the transshipment model for production planning and distribution decisions. A major U.S. car manufacturer must determine the number of cars of each of three models M1, M2, and M3 to produce at the Atlanta and Los Angeles plants, and how many of each model to ship from each plant to distribution centers in Pittsburgh and Chicago. Subject to bounds on production capacities, demands, and shipment capacities, the objective is to identify a minimum cost production-distribution plan. A network model for this problem is given in which arcs from plant locations to plant/model nodes are labeled with upper and lower bounds on production levels, and with production costs for each model at each plant. Similarly, arcs from distribution/model nodes to distribution point nodes are labeled to indicate bounds on demands. Links from plant/model nodes to distribution/model nodes are labeled with the appropriate transportation costs, and with capacity restriction limits, if any.

A solution to this problem determines the production and distribution decision for the car manufacturer; but, moreover, it solves a multi-commodity problem with a straightforward transshipment model. By having distinct nodes for each model type, the production and distribution plan for each model is established.
