# 6.10 SUMMARY


Markov processes are used to represent systems in which events take place according to specified probabilities. The characteristics of such systems evolve over time, but in many cases, the probabilities themselves can be used to predict some of these system characteristics. Markov analysis provides a framework in which to study the behavior and the emergent properties of these systems.

As events take place in a Markov process, the system makes transitions from one state to another, and these transitions occur according to transition probabilities. If it is known that a system initially is in a given state, then by using these transition probabilities, it is possible to predict the patterns with which the system passes among states and perhaps re-enters states previously occupied by the system.

Some processes involving uncertain or probabilistic transitions exhibit restricted patterns of behavior that tend to dictate the ultimate disposition of the system. However, other systems range more freely among their states indefinitely, and under certain circumstances it is possible to characterize the long-term behavior or status of these systems. Knowing this steady-state behavior of systems is very valuable to analysts in planning or budgeting resources or projecting costs or profits in systems whose events take place in an environment of uncertainty.

## KEY TERMS

absorbing chain <br>
absorbing state <br>
absorption probability <br>
aperiodic state <br>
closed set of states <br>
continuous-time stochastic process <br>
discrete-time stochastic process <br>
ergodic Markov chain <br>
expected first passage time <br>
expected recurrence time <br>
finite state Markov chain <br>
first passage probability <br>
first passage time <br>
first recurrence time <br>
fundamental matrix <br>
initial probability distribution <br>
irreducible Markov chain <br>
Markov chain <br>
Markov process <br>
Markov property <br>
one-step transition probability <br>
periodic state <br>
reachable state <br>
recurrence time <br>
recurrent state <br>
state <br>
state probabilities <br>
state probability vector <br>
state transition diagram <br>
stationarity property <br>
steady state <br>
steady state probability <br>
steady state probability vector <br>
stochastic process <br>
transient state <br>
transition <br>
transition probability <br>
transition probability matrix <br>
transition tree <br>
