# 8.5.4 Simulation for NASA's Space Launch Vehicles Operations (Kaylani et al. 2008)


For over three decades, NASA's Space Shuttle had been the only Reusable Launch Vehicle (RLV) used to deliver cargo to space. Almost a decade prior to the end of the Space Shuttle program in 2011, NASA started evaluating options and approaches for replacement programs that were more effective in terms of cost, reliability, safety and availability. It was well understood that it was necessary to study and compare future competing designs consistently to improve upon the Space Shuttle's cost, performance and turnaround time before pursuing the large undertaking of a new RLV. Previous estimates of the Shuttle's operational performance proved overly optimistic, when NASA predicted originally 50-100 flights per year at \$6 million per flight. These estimates were off by an order of magnitude for the flight rate and by two orders of magnitude for cost (the Shuttle flew five to ten times a year at a cost of about $\$ 600$ million per flight). One of the problems of most estimates was that they tended to assume best-case scenarios and failed to take into account factors that can cause operations to take longer, flights to be delayed and costs to increase.
As simulation emerged as a viable tool to model complex systems, many industries, including NASA, started using it to make more accurate predictions. Discrete Event

Simulation (DES) has been widely used for studying processes and has been frequently used in many NASA studies, including those for the Space Shuttle (Mollaghasemi et al. 2000, Cates et al. 2001, 2002). In order to compare RLV design alternatives fairly and consistently, NASA funded the development of the Generic Simulation Environment for Modeling Future Launch Operations (GEM-FLO) to predict processing turnaround times and other effectiveness criteria and to support making key business and program decisions. The primary motivation behind the development of GEM-FLO is to reduce the time and effort required to study the different system designs using simulation.
The underlying simulation model was developed using ARENA discrete event modeling software and was generically designed to be easily configured for the specific characteristics of each proposed RLV and the underlying processes needed for their operations. It accepts design characteristics and operational inputs from the user, and uses them to configure a simulation model that properly reflects the ground processing flow and requirements of that RLV. For example, every RLV is expected to start with mission planning and go through ground processing, vehicle integration, launch, mission execution, and landing. Each vehicle is expected to have multiple Flight Hardware Elements (FHEs), such as orbiters, boosters and fuel tanks. For a certain vehicle design, the number of FHEs, the necessary processing facilities and flow are entered by the user via a graphical interface and the simulation model is configured accordingly. The elements are then expected to merge into an integrated vehicle at an integration facility according to a specific flow and requirements before it moves to the next stage. Process information for all stages that a certain vehicle must go through is defined by a user who is expected to be involved in the vehicle design but not necessarily a simulation expert.
There is a trade-off between how generic and how detailed a model can be; the more detailed the requirements are, the less generic the model will be. In this application of DES, however, RLVs have common core processes that do not deviate drastically from each other, and a generic model can account for variant designs. For example, in case of the Space Shuttle, the solid rocket boosters, which are one of the FHEs, fall into the ocean after they burn out and then they go through a retrieval process. On the other hand, if a new RLV concept uses boosters that fly back on their own as a hypothetical example, we can still consider that there is a retrieval process but it uses different times and resources (instead of falling into the ocean and taking certain amount of time for divers to retrieve them, they land on a runway and take a different amount of time and resources for example).
When the simulation model is executed, it provides a number of performance measures including operations turnaround time, expected flight rate, and resource utilizations, thus enabling users to fairly assess multiple future vehicle designs using the same generic tool. Of course there is a limit to how refined the granularity of a generic model can be; if a model must be very detailed, then it might be more effective to develop separate models for each RLV instead of one generic model for all of them.
Since simulation validation of future systems is in general challenging due to nonexistence of historical data, the output produced by GEM-FLO from the ARENA software was validated using the Space Shuttle historical data. GEM-FLO was used by several NASA programs including the Next Generation Launch Technology (NGLT) Program, the Orbital Space Plane (OSP) Program, and the Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) Program.
