# 8.5 ILLUSTRATIVE APPLICATIONS

## 8.5.1 Finnish Air Force Fleet Maintenance (Mattila et al. 2008)


The aircraft in Finland's Air Force fleet typically require several hours of maintenance for every hour of flight activity. Depending on the type of aircraft, maintenance involves a variety of policies and procedures, task times, workforce personnel, and equipment, parts and materials handling. Maintenance system performance has an effect on aircraft availability, which is defined to be the number of aircraft that can be used in flight missions. Therefore, an understanding of all aspects of aircraft maintenance decision making is essential to measuring and maintaining the operational capability of the fleet. Analysts determined that discrete event simulation was the most appropriate analytical tool for studying the fleet maintenance system and its effect on aircraft availability.

An adequate model of a maintenance system for flight operations must address the types and number of aircraft, planned and unplanned maintenance, air bases and repair and maintenance sites, levels of maintenance staff, and scenarios for normal flight mission assignments as well as missions involving conflict and hence increased exposure to damage. The fleet in this case consisted of F-18 Hornet fighters, Hawk Mk 51 jet trainers, and certain other aircraft used in transportation, surveillance, and flight training. Various Air Force operational units have facilities for basic inspections, routine maintenance, or specialized shops for more complex tasks or repairs.

The goal of aircraft maintenance during normal peacetime is to preserve the long term operational readiness of the fleet. Enough aircraft must be available for routine training and reconnaissance missions. Everyday maintenance varies greatly based on the type of aircraft, but consists generally of preflight inspections, inspections following completed missions, periodic scheduled maintenance based on accumulated hours in flight, and component replacements or repairs.

Maintenance during conflict conditions must respond to incidences of specific battle damage in which repairs often require unique skills, materials, or replacement parts not needed under normal conditions. The goal of this type of maintenance is restoring failed or damaged aircraft and returning them to mission-capable status as quickly as possible. In order to achieve this goal, it may be judicious to reduce or suspend normal periodic maintenance in favor of keeping aircraft available for high intensity operations. Conflict conditions may include relocation or decentralization of maintenance facilities, and increased durations of various maintenance or repair tasks.

The simulation model for the Finnish Air Force fleet was designed to be capable of representing all the possible events related to different types of aircraft, and including the expected durations and frequencies of each type of maintenance, and materials or part requirements. The task requirements for time, personnel, and materials are estimated or represented by probability distributions. Maintenance operations are simulated under both normal and conflict scenarios. The time advance mechanism in the simulation must account for time spent by an aircraft awaiting maintenance or in transit to an appropriate maintenance site; time waiting for materials, spare parts, or tools, and time waiting for available maintenance mechanics or other crew.

In this simulation, the Finnish Air Force provided much of the actual flight operation and maintenance data and statistical parameters needed for the study. In cases where data were not directly available, analysts interviewed Air Force expert personnel who cooperated ably by offering estimates, insights, and suggestions that contributed significantly to
an accurate and successful simulation project. The simulation was developed with ARENA software based on the SIMAN language. The implementation of the model was validated by running it using actual input data and parameters, and observing that the simulation yielded results that were consistent with outcomes that had been observed in actual operational performance in the past. Following validation, numerous simulation experiments allowed analysts to vary the inputs and parameters, and predict system performance under conditions not yet experienced but that may face the Air Force in future operations.

In this simulation project, analysts created a tool that helped study how maintenance resources, policies and operating conditions influenced aircraft availability. This tool facilitated forecasting aircraft availability, analyzing and planning maintenance resource requirements, and studying the feasibility of making modifications to periodic maintenance programs and changes to other operational parameters. For example, planners and representatives from various levels within the Air Force wanted to maximize the operational capability of the fleet under conflict conditions. To this end, the simulation provided information on the expected number of aircraft available and the maximum number of flight missions that can be conducted during conflict conditions. In particular, simulation results revealed that a maintenance system sized for normal operating conditions is likely to encounter difficulties in conducting the maintenance needed during conflict, even if battle damage is small. Simulation studies can guide the Air Force in planning how maintenance resource needs can be met in conflict scenarios, including possibilities of suspending certain normal maintenance activities temporarily.

In addition to meeting the goals discussed earlier, unanticipated benefits accrued from the simulation project. Creating the maintenance model required extensive cooperation and discussions involving the simulation researchers, flight experts, mission specialists, and maintenance professionals. This interaction contributed significantly to a more thorough understanding of the entire fleet command, and it opened up potential for improved communication among personnel throughout the Air Force. The simulation model has been shared with other units in the Finnish Air Force for related maintenance studies. And the simulation also was found to be useful for training purposes, in which graduates of the Finnish Air Force Academy learned to use the simulation and applied it to their own projects in various other areas of study.
