# 8.5.3 Simulation of Eurotunnel Terminals (Salt 1991)


In December 1990, Britain and France were linked by a tunnel that was built by a consortium of companies working cooperatively to construct this underground/undersea link. Eurotunnel is the company responsible for operating the tunnel.

Two separate tunnels actually carry two distinct types of rail traffic. High speed passenger service provides connections between London, Paris, and other major European cities. Shuttle trains carry cars and other vehicles whose drivers and passengers accompany their vehicles between Folkestone in the United Kingdom and Coquelles (near Calais) in France. These vehicles pass through immigration, customs, and security checks upon entering a terminal, and drive away immediately upon arrival at their destination.

To optimize procedures at the terminals, it was first necessary to fully understand the pattern of day to day activities in each terminal. It was decided that a simulation model of a terminal would provide the most valuable basis for studying how a terminal handles the predicted demand. This study began with an interesting process of selecting the appropriate simulation tools. The final product was to be placed directly in the hands of management, and needed to be developed quickly and within existing guidelines and standards.

Several languages were considered on the basis of their various strengths. SIMULA was favored because of its object oriented approach, but the SIMGRAPHICS package in

SIMSCRIPT II. 5 was attractive because of the graphics presentation capabilities that would appeal to the managers who would ultimately be using the system.
The winning contender was MODSIM II, an object oriented language that also fully supports process based simulations. The analysts noted that MODSIM II supports multiple active methods and multiple inheritance, both of these being popular language features among proponents of object oriented programming. The language was easy to modularize, and also had a completely integrated graphics package. In short, MODSIM II was deemed to offer a practical combination of object oriented power and a good user interface.
A simulation of the Folkestone terminal was developed to model the flow of vehicle traffic through queues and service facilities to pay tolls, pass British and French customs and immigration, undergo security checks, and eventually to be placed on a shuttle train. The goal of this phase of simulation was to establish expected queue lengths and throughput times, and estimate the adequacy of overflow parking lots and waiting areas. Vehicles are classified as tourist vehicles or heavy goods vehicles and these two categories are tracked through the system via separate service facilities.
Vehicles are the objects that are acted upon by various methods for paying tolls and passing through checkpoints. Some methods deliver constant time service, while others (such as security) have service times modeled with exponential distributions (because most security checks are brief, but a few are much more extensive and require a longer time). Each service facility has the capability to reject a vehicle, so that the vehicle is removed from the system and not passed on to the next service facility. The simulation provides information on average queue lengths and average waiting times for vehicles.

Animated output and presentation graphics were used successfully in giving comprehensible output to managers, but were also helpful during the program debugging stages. The original simulation was developed on a DEC station, but networked so that managers can easily access the simulation from their own desktops with output delivered to their local printers.
