# 9 Decision Analysis


## 9.1 THE DECISION-MAKING PROCESS



Decision analysis is as much of an art as a science. Mathematical decision analysis must be considered in the context of an individual decision-maker. The techniques that have been developed in this area can be described as tools that encourage and assist people in making rational decisions. They are not intended as substitutes for the individual. Most of the techniques incorporate some interactive dialogue with the decision-maker to try to determine personal preferences and attitudes.

To truly appreciate this interaction, it is useful to try to imagine actually being faced with a particular problem. To illustrate this idea, consider the decision to buy a new car. We can easily develop a set of criteria that define a good car (price, mileage, maintenance, horsepower, etc.), and then we can devise a system of weights that measures the relative importance of each criterion. The car with the highest score is clearly the one to buy. Most people would agree that this sounds like a reasonable model. They might even be willing to recommend this selection to someone else. But imagine for a moment that you are making a decision concerning your own car. Would you be willing to accept the advice of this model without question? In fact, the majority of intelligent decision-makers tend to have reservations about accepting a strict mathematical interpretation and recommendation for their problem.

Decision analysis differs from the mathematical structure of many other areas of Operations Research in that it contains a high degree of uncertainty. The uncertainty is, in part, a by-product of any long range planning function. Traditional Operations Research problems in production planning and inventory analysis, for example, are concerned with a monthly sales forecast that may vary according to some probability distribution. In decision analysis, we may be deciding whether to develop and market a new product, build a new plant, or create a new government agency, or diversify our business interests. For example, the demand for an existing product next month is relatively predictable in most industries, but the demand for a new and unfamiliar product in five years' time is virtually impossible to estimate. Such issues as these can have a major impact, and an analysis of the effect of any current decision will not be fully appreciated for five or ten years into the future. The factors that must be considered in the decision process often involve a dramatic degree of uncertainty simply by virtue of the extended time frame.

Decision analysis can usually be expressed as a problem of selecting among a set of possible alternatives or courses of action. After making a choice, and at some future time, there will be a number of external, uncontrollable variables that will influence the final outcome. These external variables are often referred to as states of nature or state variables. An underlying assumption in decision analysis is that, if it were possible to predict
accurately the result of these external variables, then the final outcome would also be predictable and the correct alternative would become obvious.
This section discusses a simple decision-making problem. Despite its simplicity, it illustrates many of the difficulties inherent in the decision-making process. Imagine yourself in the following situation. It is midnight on a Sunday night and you have just remembered that you were supposed to prepare a report for your boss for next week. Unfortunately, you cannot remember whether you were supposed to meet with him first thing on Monday morning, or if it was required for next Thursday. You are faced with a decision: should you stay up and work on the report for two or three hours, or should you take your chances and go to bed? This statement defines the alternative courses of action for the problem, which we will refer to as the decision variables.
The unknown external factor or state of nature is whether or not the report is due on Monday. If you knew that the report was not due until Thursday, you could go to bed and sleep peacefully. We will assume that, if it were known that the report was due tomorrow, the decision maker would feel obliged to stay up and work on it. Otherwise, there is no decision problem because the preferred action would be to go to bed independent of whether it is due on Monday or Thursday.
Having defined the alternatives (decision variables) and the external factors (state variables), the next aspect of decision analysis is to consider the possible outcomes or payoffs that would result from each possible combination of decision and state variables. In this example, as with many large practical problems, the outcome is not clearly defined. There may be a monetary component in the outcome (because the decision may affect future promotion potential and merit pay increases), but there are also a number of other less tangible consequences.
One method of concisely describing this type of problem is called a payoff matrix. The rows correspond to the possible states, the columns represent alternatives, and the entries in the matrix describe the outcomes associated with each possible combination of the problem variables. In traditional decision problems, an outcome is described by a single numerical value representing an associated profit, loss, or value of the result. For the moment, we address such problems using informal, verbal descriptions of the outcomes.

| States | Alternatives |  |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
|  | $\mathrm{a}_{1}$ : Stay up, do it | $\mathrm{a}_{1}$ : Go to bed |
| $\Theta_{1}$ : Report due | Tired, but happy <br> - Lost some sleep <br> - Guessed correctly | Miserable <br> - Guessed wrong <br> - The boss will be annoyed |
| $\Theta_{2}$ : Report not due | Depressed <br> - Lost sleep for nothing | Relieved <br> - Guessed right <br> - Did you worry? <br> - Sleep well? |

This simple example illustrates some of the most difficult and frustrating aspects of decision making. Several observations can be made concerning the difficulties in quantifying the elements of decision-making:

Outcomes are often verbal descriptions. The problem of comparing outcomes is often complicated by the fact that the entries can be descriptive rather than numeric. In our example, is Depressed worse than Miserable? How much worse? Twice as
bad? Is Tired but happy better than Relieved? Is the negative feeling of Depressed greater than the positive result of Relieved? The answers to these questions depend on the individual. For some people, the prospect of having to face the boss in the morning and admitting failure is unthinkable. Other people may do it regularly, presumably armed with a battery of excuses.
The outcomes often involve several conflicting criteria. The previous example illustrates the effect of multiple objectives that are commonly associated with practical decisions. The objectives of getting a good night's sleep and of maximizing one's credibility at the office are, in this case, conflicting goals. The same is true of corporate decision-making. Companies must distinguish between immediate profits and long-term advantages. For example, an investment today for upgrading present facilities will decrease this year's net profit, but may lead to increased future revenue. In addition, intangible costs and benefits such as worker attitudes, safety, environmental issues, legal liability, and customer satisfaction are difficult to quantify.
Even numeric outcomes are difficult to compare. Consider a decision problem in which all of the payoff matrix entries are described in simple terms of dollars of profit or loss. Most people do not consider a profit of $\$ 20,000$ to be twice as good as a profit of \$10,000. In economic theory, this principle is known as the Law of Diminishing Marginal Returns. The classic illustration of this concept says that three loaves of bread are not three times as valuable as one loaf of bread. If you had one loaf, you would eat it and satisfy your hunger. If you had three loaves, the third one would likely be unused.

The same logic applies to profits. People (perhaps unconsciously) normally employ some implicit ordering of the alternative ways of spending their money. The first dollar will be used for the most important item, while the last dollar may just go in the bank. The true value of the first dollar in terms of benefit or enjoyment is considerably greater than that of the last one.

This line of reasoning seems even more valid when comparing profits against potential losses. For most people, the negative feeling associated with losing $\$ 10,000$ is much greater than the corresponding positive benefit of winning an equal amount. The profit would be very pleasant, but the loss would be terrible. Losses are generally viewed as being more dramatic consequences than gains. An important aspect of decision analysis concerns the determination of an individual's attitude toward risk. We introduce some approaches for dealing with these questions in Section 9.4 on Utility Theory.
The relative likelihood of the uncertain state variables must be considered. In the earlier example, suppose that you believed that the report is most likely due on Monday. In that case, you would be inclined to stay up and write it. However, the situation changes dramatically if you felt that the report was probably not expected until Thursday. If you trusted your judgment, you would go to bed. To make a choice, the decision-maker must try to associate a subjective probability value with each of the possible states. What is your best approximation of the likelihood of each uncertain event? We distinguish between three different approaches to defining probability.

Risk describes a situation for which an objective probability can be calculated. This includes most events that are repeated frequently as historical data is
available. Based on past information, it is possible to compute a reasonably accurate probability assessment of the state variable. For example, there is a certain amount of risk associated with drilling oil wells, but using land form data and other inputs, the probability of success can be predicted and this information can then be used in drilling decisions.

Uncertainty normally applies to events for which there is limited historical or repetitive information. When attempting to estimate the probability of success of a new product, it is difficult to predict how the public will react. This is especially true when there have been no similar products introduced in the market. Although there is no data that allows precise computation of objective probabilities of success, an analyst may have some feeling or intuition or experience or limited history that allows at least a subjective assessment of the probability. In the decision example earlier, you might say that you are $60 \%-80 \%$ sure that the report is due on Monday. Note that the real distinction between risk and uncertainty is that risk is generally more precise. Under uncertainty, it may be possible to specify a range for the probability.

Complete ignorance describes a decision-maker who has no prior information of any kind with regard to the likelihood of a state variable. Such a person refuses to specify a subjective, intuitive probability range. Anything could happen and he would not be surprised. Many people feel uncomfortable about specifying subjective probabilities for state variables. Section 9.2 introduces the topic of Game Theory, and describes several methods that can be applied in the face of complete ignorance. It will become clear that the use of subjective probability assessments is often preferable.
Decision-makers are irrational. There is a rapidly growing literature describing the rather curious phenomenon of the irrational decision-maker in all of us. For the present, consider one simple example of this behavior: decision-makers will often lie about their true objectives. When middle managers are asked about their objectives in decisions, they will stress the importance of corporate profit and the overall benefit of the company. Their true objectives are often more selfish and reflect the desire that their own work centers look good. University students might claim that they are primarily interested in the quality of their education when, in fact, their main objective may be to get a diploma with the least amount of effort possible. A new car buyer will often rank safety as a high priority and then select the fastest and raciest sports model. We all have a tendency toward specifying objectives that we believe we should be using or that we think our boss would like to hear rather than being honest about them. We consider these and related issues when we discuss the psychology of decision-making in Section 9.5.

In summary, the foregoing example contains many of the underlying features that complicate decision analysis. In the remainder of this chapter, these features are presented in further detail. It should be mentioned from the outset that the amount of time and money invested in a decision should be a small fraction of the value of the potential outcome. As a general rule, one should spend about $1 \%$ of the potential value of a decision on the decision process itself. In the given example, the decision process should not take more than a few minutes. A detailed study of the options is unwarranted. However, in making the decision to buy a $\$ 200,000$ house, it might be worth spending $\$ 2,000$ in time and money on analyzing the alternatives and making a good selection.
