# 4.11 SUMMARY


Many important engineering, industrial, organizational, and financial systems can be modeled as mathematical programming problems in which the variables are restricted to integer values, $0-1$ values, or a mixture of integer and real values. Solving integer problems usually requires significantly more computational effort than is needed for solving continuous (real) linear programming problems.
Certain $0-1$ models have become rather famous because their structures seem to arise in so many different kinds of practical applications. Specialized methods for solving such problems have been devised that take advantage of the mathematical structure inherent in the problems. These classical models include the traveling salesman problem, knapsack and bin packing problems, set partitioning, and generalized assignment problem. Many complex problems can be solved by identifying subproblems that have the characteristics of these well-known models, and creating a solution to the large and difficult problem by solving some simple subproblems.
Among the most effective methods for solving general integer programming problems are branch-and-bound algorithms. These methods repeatedly break large problems, which are not yet solved, into easier subproblems, imposing integer constraints along the way, until a solution to the original problem is finally found. Solutions to real-valued LP problems are used to guide the process, so that the computation does not escalate into an enumeration of exponentially many possible solutions.
A number of other approaches have been developed and refined over the years. Cutting plane and cover inequality methods repeatedly introduce new constraints into integer problems in order to exclude non-integer extreme points from the feasible region, and then use simple LP solutions to locate the optimum, which then occurs at an integer point. Lagrangian relaxation incorporates constraints into the objective function by placing a penalty on any violated constraint. Any solution that violates a constraint has a lower value than a solution with no constraint violation. The penalties must be chosen appropriately
for the given problem. The technique of column-generation is applicable to problems such as vehicle routing and workforce scheduling, in which customers or workers must be assigned to trucks or work patterns. Incomplete initial solutions are iteratively built up into complete optimal solutions.
Most methods for solving integer programming problems rely on solving linear subproblems using a standard technique such as the Simplex method. Thus, the performance of many integer solution methods depends greatly on the efficiency of the underlying LP methods. Recent improvements in LP solvers have contributed substantially to our present capabilities for solving large practical integer problems efficiently.

## KEY TERMS

active node <br>
airline crew scheduling <br>
assignment problem <br>
backtracking <br>
bin packing problem <br>
binary integer programming <br>
branch-and-bound <br>
branch-and-bound tree <br>
branching strategy <br>
bounding strategy <br>
capacity planning <br>
capital budgeting problem <br>
cargo loading problem <br>
column-generation <br>
convex hull <br>
cover <br>
cover inequality <br>
current incumbent <br>
cutting plane <br>
cutting stock problem <br>
employee scheduling problem <br>
examination timetabling <br>
facet <br>
fathomed <br>
fixed charge problem <br>
flight crew <br>
flight legs <br>
general integer programming <br>
generalized assignment problem <br>
Gomory fractional cut <br>
integer polytope <br>
integer programming <br>
integrality gap <br>
jumptracking <br>
knapsack problem <br>
Lagrangian <br>
Lagrangian relaxation <br>
minimal cover <br>
mixed integer programming <br>
portfolio selection problem <br>
production planning <br>
production scheduling <br>
relaxation <br>
rotation <br>
separate <br>
separation rule <br>
set covering <br>
set packing <br>
set partitioning <br>
shift scheduling <br>
single sourcing <br>
sub-tour <br>
traveling salesman problem <br>
vehicle routing <br>
warehouse location <br>
work schedule <br>
zero-one (or 0-1) programming <br>
