# 9.5.7 Irrational Human Behavior


Reconsider the game show problem described earlier. The contestant was asked to pick one of three doors and he chose door number 2. The host now opens door 3 to reveal a consolation prize and asks the contestant if he would like to switch his selection from door 2 to door 1 . What is the probability that the grand prize is behind door number 1? Many people (and many actual contestants) believe that the probability has been reduced to a $50-50$ proposition between the two remaining doors, and they will agonize over this new decision, often sticking to their original choice.
In actual fact, they should always switch. The probability that the door initially selected, door number 2, was the one that concealed the grand prize, was one third and it still is one third. Whether or not the initial choice was correct, it is certain that at least one of the other two doors contains a consolation prize. The host, who knows where the grand prize is, simply verified the fact that one of the two doors was wrong, and he has not really given any new probability information. The probability that the door initially selected was the right door is still only one third, and therefore, the probability that door number 1 is correct must be two-thirds. Consequently, the contestant should always switch. The reader who is still skeptical should try the experiment outlined in Exercise 9.1. As has been stated already, people often feel that additional information must improve the
validity of their probability estimates. But, in fact, more information is not always helpful to an irrational human decision-maker.

## 9.5.7.1 What Can We Do about Irrational Behavior?

1. One of the most important tools for combating irrational behavior and biases is through proper training. Simply making people aware of the biases described earlier can improve their understanding of the decision process, and they can avoid making some of the common mistakes.
2. A decision simulator works on the same principle as the jet aircraft simulator for training pilots. The decision-maker is presented with a large number of different situations (one at a time) and asked to choose a course of action. The simulator immediately gives him the consequences of his decisions and, if possible, the results of the optimal decision. The cases used in the simulator can be actual historical problems with known outcomes. (e.g., Lembersky and Chi [1986] describe a computer simulator that helps decision-makers at Weyerhauser to decide more effectively how trees should be cut in order to maximize profit.)
3. A less-expensive form of training is feedback. Decision-makers will estimate probabilities of various market parameters in predicting the success of a product, but they seldom get any direct feedback on the quality of their intuition. If the product is successful, they must be doing something right. By comparing their original estimates with the actual results, it is possible to improve their future prediction skills.
4. Another method of reducing bias is by automatic correction procedures. For example, when we must forecast future sales, we could use an expert and a simple linear regression model, and then split the difference between the two. The assumption here is that the expert will have more information than the regression model, but that the human has a tendency to overreact.
5. A common approach to eliminating bias is to ask a number of redundant questions. In particular, we can reduce the effect of the zero illusion by rephrasing the same question in several different ways with the zero shifted to make people aware of the effect.
6. We must recognize the limitations of the human decision-maker as well as the strengths. Dawes (1982) compares human judgment with linear regression in a variety of selection processes and concludes that the linear models are generally superior to expert decision-makers. Human experts were often found to be much better at gathering and encoding information than they were at integrating it and using it effectively in decision-making.
