# 9.5.4 Dissonance Reduction


Consider the decision to buy a new car. Most people will begin this exercise with total objectivity. They will develop a list of desirable features and decide on a budget limitation. After visiting several dealers, test driving the cars, talking to people and collecting brochures, they will compile a mental catalog of the possibilities, and start objectively removing certain alternatives that are too expensive, too slow, or too small.

As this process continues, the decision-maker reduces the set of options to some small group of items that are all, in some sense, equally acceptable. It becomes difficult to choose between them, and the decision-maker enters a phase called dissonance. A choice must be made; and at this point, the decision-maker will become very subjective, and simply pick one alternative. This is perfectly rational because all of the options have been judged to be of equal utility to him.

Having now made a choice, the majority of psychologically stable decision-makers then enter a completely irrational phase called dissonance reduction, in which they try to convince themselves that the alternative they selected was, in fact, the very best one by far. They will exaggerate favorable qualities and down-play the less attractive ones.

This type of justification after the fact is irrational, but it is also necessary in order to dispel the feeling of dissonance. People who do not enter this phase may spend the rest of their lives doubting themselves and worrying about whether they made the right decision, and they might never really be satisfied with their decision.

This behavior is important in decision analysis in a practical environment because business decision-makers will also subconsciously employ dissonance reduction. Once they have made their decision, they become increasingly stubborn about it. They will tend to discredit any new information that does not confirm the wisdom of their original choice. It may be very difficult to return to the initial objective context of decision-making after having mentally justified the choice that was made.
