# 9.5.2 Availability


When decision-makers are asked to make subjective probability assessments of uncertain future events, their judgment depends on their personal available store of information. Unfortunately, the availability of information is often influenced by subjective external events. People make decisions based on the experiences related to them by a trusted friend, events they read about in the morning newspaper, or what they saw on the way to work.
To illustrate, suppose that we ask people to estimate the probability of an airline accident. Some people may actually go to the trouble of collecting statistics on flight accident rates over the past few years, but most would simply use their intuition. Their probability estimates would be strongly influenced by recently reading about an accident or by knowing someone who was involved in a crash. People who actually witness this kind of disaster often conclude that the risk is so high that they will decide never to fly again. Observe that none of these events reflects the true probability of an accident. People often make probability assessments based on very limited personal experiences.
The same logic applies in business decision-making. An executive who has previously been involved in a risky venture that failed will be very reluctant to try anything like it in the future. His own estimation of the probability of success has been greatly reduced. The availability and use of such highly subjective input can produce very irrational behavior.
