# 8.3.1 Gathering Statistics


Because we are currently concerned primarily with the simulation of queueing systems, it is reasonable that the information we would like to obtain from the simulation is just exactly the same type of information that we would calculate with analytical queueing formulae, if we could (i.e., if we had a queueing system in steady-state with known distributions describing arrival and departure patterns). In particular, we might like to determine the average time a customer spends in the system and waiting, the average number of customers in the queue, and the utilization factor of the service facility.

We can return to Example 8.2.1 and show how such information can be gathered. It is important to realize, however, that as we determine these measures of system behavior, we are doing so only for the specific system with the particular arrivals and departures given in the table, and only for the particular time interval covered by these events. No generalization can be drawn about typical behavior of the system over the long term. (If it is desirable to make inferences about the steady state characteristics of a simulated system, then a number of issues need to be considered. We will return to this subject after we work through our Example.)

## 8.3.1.1 Average Time in System

For every customer i, compute

$$
\begin{aligned}
\mathrm{T}_{\mathrm{i}} & =\text { Time spent in the system } \\
& =\text { Time of service completion }- \text { Time of arrival }
\end{aligned}
$$

Then accumulate the sum of these $\mathrm{T}_{\mathrm{i}}$ and divide by the number of customers N :

$$
\text { Average time in system }=\frac{\left(\sum_{\mathrm{i}=1}^{\mathrm{N}} \mathrm{~T}_{\mathrm{i}}\right)}{\mathrm{N}}
$$

In the simulation, initialize the sum to zero; then at every service completion event, compute the $\mathrm{T}_{\mathrm{i}}$ for this customer and add it to the sum. At the end of the simulation, perform the division. In the Example 8.2.1, we can obtain the $\mathrm{T}_{\mathrm{i}}$ from Table 8.2 and compute the sum

$$
2+3+7+4+5+2+3+6+5+5=42
$$

Then the average time in the system for these ten programs is $42 / 10=4.2$ time units.