# 8.3.2 Design of Simulation Experiments


In designing a system simulation in which events are to be generated randomly (rather than introduced into the system deterministically), several questions arise:

- How to start the simulation?
- What to measure?
- What data to gather?
- How long to run the simulation?
- How to recognize whether the system has reached equilibrium?
- How many simulation runs to make?
- What recommendations to make concerning modification of the system being simulated?

We do not necessarily intend to offer answers to these questions, but rather merely to raise the issues that must be considered by the analyst or system designer.
Once a simulation program is developed, and is ready to run, the initial system status must be determined. It may be reasonable to initialize a system as having idle servers and no customers, and let customers begin to arrive randomly. Eventually, there will emerge a certain pattern of queue utilization and service utilization, but when exactly does the real pattern emerge? For example, when a bank opens its doors at 9 a.m., it makes sense to assume that the system is empty when it starts. However, if we are simulating a hospital, we probably should run the simulation in start-up mode for several days before enough patients have been accumulated so that the apparent simulated demand on the system becomes realistic.
When is it then appropriate to begin observing the system and collecting data about queue length, waiting time, and server utilization? It is not valid to start collecting statistics until the system has reached its steady state, but this point is difficult to identify
precisely. How long should the simulation run after initialization? It would be useful to somehow acquire information in advance (perhaps from previous similar simulations) that describes the system after the initial irregular system behavior patterns have disappeared. It is, however, often difficult to know this in advance.

The questions of what to measure and what data to gather depend of course on the original purpose of performing the simulation. In simulating waiting line systems, there are several obvious performance criteria of common interest. In simulating more general systems, a great deal of data is potentially available; yet gathering all this data is costly and may complicate the simulation program. The efficiency of a simulation may depend on the clear-headed analyst's decision to measure only the behaviors that are relevant to the study.

Perhaps the most important, and most expensive, question is how long to run a simulation, and how to know when additional computation is not going to yield additional information. Recall from our study of Markov and queueing systems that not all systems ever reach a steady state. Some display periodic behavior or other unstable patterns. It may be difficult to know in advance whether the system being simulated is guaranteed to reach a steady state. If it does eventually stabilize, we know that the length of time it takes for this to occur depends on the initial conditions. The only way to make the decision of how long to run a simulation is to gather data, accumulate performance measures (such as average queue length), and compare these measures with those measured earlier in the simulation. When they cease to change significantly, it might be reasonable to surmise that a steady state has been reached. (It could of course be a temporary phenomenon. How can we know for sure?)

Once a simulation program is developed and all the design parameters for a single run have been established, the next question is how many runs to make. Presumably there will be some statistical variations in the system performance measures obtained during each run. So how many samples do we need in order to be confident that we have captured the reality of the system being modeled? Do we make a fixed number of runs? Or enough runs that the variance in outcomes is acceptably low? And if we make numerous runs, should they all cover the identical span of simulated time, or should the simulated time intervals be varied or shifted? Should the various runs involve different system parameters? (For example, we might wish to compare the performance of a computer system with one CPU with that of a system having two CPUs, each with $60 \%$ of the speed of the single CPU.) To make such comparisons, it is likely that a battery of experiments would have to be performed for each case. Based on such observations, recommendations could be made for alternative systems having different strengths, advantages, or costs.
